The Project Gutenberg EBook of New Latin Grammar, by Charles E. Bennett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: New Latin Grammar

Author: Charles E. Bennett

Release Date: April 20, 2005 [EBook #15665]

Language: English

Character set encoding: Unicode UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NEW LATIN GRAMMAR ***




Produced by Nathan Gibson, Keith Edkins and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.




NEW LATIN GRAMMAR

BY

CHARLES E. BENNETT

Goldwin Smith Professor of Latin in Cornell University

  _Quicquid praecipies, esto brevis, ut cito dicta_
  _Percipiant animi dociles teneantque fideles:_
  _Omne supervacuum pleno de pectore manat._
                  --HORACE, _Ars Poetica_.

COPYRIGHT, 1895; 1908; 1918 BY CHARLES E. BENNETT

       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE.

The present work is a revision of that published in 1908. No radical
alterations have been introduced, although a number of minor changes will
be noted. I have added an Introduction on the origin and development of the
Latin language, which it is hoped will prove interesting and instructive to
the more ambitious pupil. At the end of the book will be found an Index to
the Sources of the Illustrative Examples cited in the Syntax.

C.E.B.

ITHACA, NEW YORK,
May 4, 1918

       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.

The present book is a revision of my _Latin Grammar_ originally published
in 1895. Wherever greater accuracy or precision of statement seemed
possible, I have endeavored to secure this. The rules for syllable division
have been changed and made to conform to the prevailing practice of the
Romans themselves. In the Perfect Subjunctive Active, the endings _-īs_,
_-īmus_, _-ītis_ are now marked long. The theory of vowel length before the
suffixes -gnus, -gna, -gnum, and also before j, has been discarded. In the
Syntax I have recognized a special category of Ablative of Association, and
have abandoned the original doctrine as to the force of tenses in the
Prohibitive.

Apart from the foregoing, only minor and unessential modifications have
been introduced. In its main lines the work remains unchanged.

ITHACA, NEW YORK,
October 16, 1907.

       *       *       *       *       *

FROM THE PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION.

The object of this book is to present _the essential facts_ of Latin
grammar in a direct and simple manner, and within the smallest compass
consistent with scholarly standards. While intended primarily for the
secondary school, it has not neglected the needs of the college student,
and aims to furnish such grammatical information as is ordinarily required
in undergraduate courses.

The experience of foreign educators in recent years has tended to restrict
the size of school-grammars of Latin, and has demanded an incorporation of
the main principles of the language in compact manuals of 250 pages. Within
the past decade, several grammars of this scope have appeared abroad which
have amply met the most exacting demands.

The publication in this country of a grammar of similar plan and scope
seems fully justified at the present time, as all recent editions of
classic texts summarize in introductions the special idioms of grammar and
style peculiar to individual authors. This makes it feasible to dispense
with the enumeration of many _minutiae_ of usage which would otherwise
demand consideration in a student's grammar.

In the chapter on Prosody, I have designedly omitted all special treatment
of the lyric metres of Horace and Catullus, as well as of the measures of
the comic poets. Our standard editions of these authors all give such
thorough consideration to versification that repetition in a separate place
seems superfluous.

ITHACA, NEW YORK,
December 15, 1894.

TABLE OF CONTENTS.

  Introduction--The Latin language

PART I.

SOUNDS, ACCENT, QUANTITY, ETC.

  The Alphabet § 1
  Classification of Sounds § 2
  Sounds of the Letters § 3
  Syllables § 4
  Quantity § 5
  Accent § 6
  Vowel Changes § 7
  Consonant Changes § 8
  Peculiarities of Orthography § 9

PART II.

INFLECTIONS.

    CHAPTER I.--_Declension._

          A. NOUNS. § 10

  Gender of Nouns § 13
  Number § 16
  Cases § 17
  The Five Declensions § 18
  First Declension § 20
  Second Declension § 23
  Third Declension § 28
  Fourth Declension § 48
  Fifth Declension § 51
  Defective Nouns § 54

          B. ADJECTIVES. § 62

  Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions § 63
  Adjectives of the Third Declension § 67
  Comparison of Adjectives § 71
  Formation and Comparison of Adverbs § 76
  Numerals § 78

          C. PRONOUNS. § 82

  Personal Pronouns § 84
  Reflexive Pronouns § 85
  Possessive Pronouns § 86
  Demonstrative Pronouns § 87
  The Intensive Pronoun § 88
  The Relative Pronoun § 89
  Interrogative Pronouns § 90
  Indefinite Pronouns § 91
  Pronominal Adjectives § 92

    CHAPTER II.--_Conjugation. § 93_

  Verb Stems § 97
  The Four Conjugations § 98
  Conjugation of _Sum_ § 100
  First Conjugation § 101
  Second Conjugation § 103
  Third Conjugation § 105
  Fourth Conjugation § 107
  Verbs in _-iō_ of the Third Conjugation § 109
  Deponent Verbs § 112
  Semi-Deponents § 114
  Periphrastic Conjugation § 115
  Peculiarities of Conjugation § 116
  Formation of the Verb Stems § 117
  List of the Most Important Verbs with Principal Parts § 120
  Irregular Verbs § 124
  Defective Verbs § 133
  Impersonal Verbs § 138

PART III.

PARTICLES. § 139

  Adverbs § 140
  Prepositions § 141
  Interjections § 145

PART IV.

WORD FORMATION.

  I. DERIVATIVES. § 146

  Nouns § 147
  Adjectives § 150
  Verbs § 155
  Adverbs § 157

  II. COMPOUNDS. § 158

  Examples of Compounds § 159

PART V.

SYNTAX.

    CHAPTER I.--_Sentences._

  Classification of Sentences § 161
  Form of Interrogative Sentences § 162
  Subject and Predicate § 163
  Simple and Compound Sentences § 164

    CHAPTER II.--_Syntax of Nouns._

  Subject § 166
  Predicate Nouns § 167
  Appositives § 169
  The Nominative § 170
  The Accusative § 172
  The Dative § 186
  The Genitive § 194
  The Ablative § 213
  The Locative § 232

    CHAPTER III.--_Syntax of Adjectives._

  Agreement of Adjectives § 234
  Adjectives used Substantively § 236
  Adjectives with the Force of Adverbs § 239
  Comparatives and Superlatives § 240
  Other Peculiarities § 241

    CHAPTER IV.--_Syntax of Pronouns._

  Personal Pronouns § 242
  Possessive Pronouns § 243
  Reflexive Pronouns § 244
  Reciprocal Pronouns § 245
  Demonstrative Pronouns § 246
  Relative Pronouns § 250
  Indefinite Pronouns § 252
  Pronominal Adjectives § 253

    CHAPTER V.--_Syntax of Verbs._

  Agreement of Verbs § 254
  Voices § 256
  Tenses
  -- Of the Indicative § 257
  -- Of the Subjunctive § 266
  -- Of the Infinitive § 270
  Moods
  -- In Independent Sentences § 271
  -- -- Volitive Subjunctive § 273
  -- -- Optative Subjunctive § 279
  -- -- Potential Subjunctive § 280
  -- -- Imperative § 281
  -- In Dependent Clauses
  -- -- Clauses of Purpose § 282
  -- -- Clauses of Characteristic § 283
  -- -- Clauses of Result § 284
  -- -- Causal Clauses § 285
  -- -- Temporal Clauses
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Postquam_, _Ut_, _Ubi_, etc. § 287
  -- -- -- _Cum_-Clauses § 288
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Antequam_ and _Priusquam_ § 291
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Dum_, _Dōnec_, _Quoad_ § 293
  -- -- Substantive Clauses § 294
  -- -- -- Developed from the Volitive § 295
  -- -- -- Developed from the Optative § 296
  -- -- -- Of Result § 297
  -- -- -- After _nōn dubito_, etc. § 298
  -- -- -- Introduced by _Quod_ § 299
  -- -- -- Indirect Questions § 300
  -- -- Conditional Sentences § 301
  -- -- Use of _Sī_, _Nisi_, _Sīn_ § 306
  -- -- Conditional Clauses of Comparison § 307
  -- -- Concessive Clauses § 308
  -- -- Adversative Clauses with _Quamvīs_, _Quamquam_, etc. § 309
  -- -- Clauses of Wish and Proviso § 310
  -- -- Relative Clauses § 311
  -- -- Indirect Discourse § 313
  -- -- -- Moods in Indirect Discourse § 314
  -- -- -- Tenses in Indirect Discourse § 317
  -- -- -- Conditional Sentences in Indirect Discourse § 319
  -- -- Implied Indirect Discourse § 323
  -- -- Subjunctive by Attraction § 324
  Noun and Adjective Forms of the Verb § 325
  -- Infinitive § 326
  -- Participles § 336
  -- Gerund § 338
  -- Supine § 340

    CHAPTER VI.--_Particles._

  Coördinate Conjunctions § 341
  Adverbs § 347

    CHAPTER VII.--_Word-Order and Sentence-Structure._

  Word-Order § 348
  Sentence-Structure § 351

    CHAPTER VIII.--_Hints on Latin Style. § 352_

  Nouns § 353
  Adjectives § 354
  Pronouns § 355
  Verbs § 356
  The Cases § 357

PART VI.

PROSODY. § 360

  Quantity of Vowels and Syllables § 362
  Verse-Structure § 366
  The Dactylic Hexameter § 368
  The Dactylic Pentameter § 369
  Iambic Measures § 370

SUPPLEMENTS TO THE GRAMMAR.

    I. Roman Calendar § 371
   II. Roman Names § 373
  III. Figures of Syntax and Rhetoric § 374

       *       *       *       *       *

  Index to the Illustrative Examples Cited in the Syntax
  Index to the Principal Parts of Latin Verbs
  General Index
  Footnotes

       *       *       *       *       *

INTRODUCTION.

THE LATIN LANGUAGE.

1. The Indo-European Family of Languages.--Latin belongs to one group of a
large family of languages, known as _Indo-European_.[1] This Indo-European
family of languages embraces the following groups:

ASIATIC MEMBERS OF THE INDO-EUROPEAN FAMILY.

a. _The Sanskrit_, spoken in ancient India. Of this there were several
stages, the oldest of which is the Vedic, or language of the Vedic Hymns.
These Hymns are the oldest literary productions known to us among all the
branches of the Indo-European family. A conservative estimate places them
as far back as 1500 B.C. Some scholars have even set them more than a
thousand years earlier than this, i.e. anterior to 2500 B.C.

The Sanskrit, in modified form, has always continued to be spoken in India,
and is represented to-day by a large number of dialects descended from the
ancient Sanskrit, and spoken by millions of people.

b. _The Iranian_, spoken in ancient Persia, and closely related to the
Sanskrit. There were two main branches of the Iranian group, viz. the Old
Persian and the Avestan. The Old Persian was the official language of the
court, and appears in a number of so-called cuneiform[2] inscriptions, the
earliest of which date from the time of Darius I (sixth century B.C.). The
other branch of the Iranian, the Avestan,[3] is the language of the Avesta
or sacred books of the Parsees, the followers of Zoroaster, founder of the
religion of the fire-worshippers. Portions of these sacred books may have
been composed as early as 1000 B.C.

Modern Persian is a living representative of the old Iranian speech. It has
naturally been much modified by time, particularly through the introduction
of many words from the Arabic.

c. _The Armenian_, spoken in Armenia, the district near the Black Sea and
Caucasus Mountains. This is closely related to the Iranian, and was
formerly classified under that group. It is now recognized as entitled to
independent rank. The earliest literary productions of the Armenian
language date from the fourth and fifth centuries of the Christian era. To
this period belong the translation of the Scriptures and the old Armenian
Chronicle. The Armenian is still a living language, though spoken in widely
separated districts, owing to the scattered locations in which the
Armenians are found to-day.

d. _The Tokharian_. This language, only recently discovered and identified
as Indo-European, was spoken in the districts east of the Caspian Sea
(modern Turkestan). While in some respects closely related to the three
Asiatic branches of the Indo-European family already considered, in others
it shows close relationship to the European members of the family. The
literature of the Tokharian, so far as it has been brought to light,
consists mainly of translations from the Sanskrit sacred writings, and
dates from the seventh century of our era.

EUROPEAN MEMBERS OF THE INDO-EUROPEAN FAMILY.

e. _The Greek_. The Greeks had apparently long been settled in Greece and
Asia Minor as far back as 1500 B.C. Probably they arrived in these
districts much earlier. The earliest literary productions are the Iliad and
the Odyssey of Homer, which very likely go back to the ninth century B.C.
From the sixth century B.C. on, Greek literature is continuous. Modern
Greek, when we consider its distance in time from antiquity, is remarkably
similar to the classical Greek of the fourth and fifth centuries B.C.

f. _The Italic Group._ The Italic Group embraces the Umbrian, spoken in the
northern part of the Italian peninsula (in ancient Umbria); the Latin,
spoken in the central part (in Latium); the Oscan, spoken in the southern
part (in Samnium, Campania, Lucania, etc.). Besides these, there were a
number of minor dialects, such as the Marsian, Volscian, etc. Of all these
(barring the Latin), there are no remains except a few scanty inscriptions.
Latin literature begins shortly after 250 B.C. in the works of Livius
Andronicus, Naevius, and Plautus, although a few brief inscriptions are
found belonging to a much earlier period.

g. _The Celtic._ In the earliest historical times of which we have any
record, the Celts occupied extensive portions of northern Italy, as well as
certain areas in central Europe; but after the second century B.C., they
are found only in Gaul and the British Isles. Among the chief languages
belonging to the Celtic group are the Gallic, spoken in ancient Gaul; the
Breton, still spoken in the modern French province of Brittany; the Irish,
which is still extensively spoken in Ireland among the common people, the
Welsh; and the Gaelic of the Scotch Highlanders.

h. _The Teutonic._ The Teutonic group is very extensive. Its earliest
representative is the Gothic, preserved for us in the translation of the
scriptures by the Gothic Bishop Ulfilas (about 375 A.D.). Other languages
belonging to this group are the Old Norse, once spoken in Scandinavia, and
from which are descended the modern Icelandic, Norwegian, Swedish, Danish;
German; Dutch; Anglo-Saxon, from which is descended the modern English.

i. _The Balto-Slavic._ The languages of this group belong to eastern
Europe. The Baltic division of the group embraces the Lithuanian and
Lettic, spoken to-day by the people living on the eastern shores of the
Baltic Sea. The earliest literary productions of these languages date from
the sixteenth century. The Slavic division comprises a large number of
languages, the most important of which are the Russian, the Bulgarian, the
Serbian, the Bohemian, the Polish. All of these were late in developing a
literature, the earliest to do so being the Old Bulgarian, in which we find
a translation of the Bible dating from the ninth century.

j. _The Albanian_, spoken in Albania and parts of Greece, Italy, and
Sicily. This is most nearly related to the Balto-Slavic group, and is
characterized by the very large proportion of words borrowed from Latin,
Turkish, Greek, and Slavic. Its literature does not begin till the
seventeenth century.

2. Home of the Indo-European Family.--Despite the many outward differences
of the various languages of the foregoing groups, a careful examination of
their structure and vocabulary demonstrates their intimate relationship and
proves overwhelmingly their descent from a common parent. We must believe,
therefore, that at one time there existed a homogeneous clan or tribe of
people speaking a language from which all the above enumerated languages
are descended. The precise location of the home of this ancient tribe
cannot be determined. For a long time it was assumed that it was in central
Asia north of the Himalaya Mountains, but this view has long been rejected
as untenable. It arose from the exaggerated importance attached for a long
while to Sanskrit. The great antiquity of the earliest literary remains of
the Sanskrit (the Vedic Hymns) suggested that the inhabitants of India were
geographically close to the original seat of the Indo-European Family.
Hence the home was sought in the elevated plateau to the north. To-day it
is thought that central or southeastern Europe is much more likely to have
been the cradle of the Indo-European parent-speech, though anything like a
logical demonstration of so difficult a problem can hardly be expected.

As to the size and extent of the original tribe whence the Indo-European
languages have sprung, we can only speculate. It probably was not large,
and very likely formed a compact racial and linguistic unit for centuries,
possibly for thousands of years.

The time at which Indo-European unity ceased and the various individual
languages began their separate existence, is likewise shrouded in
obscurity. When we consider that the separate existence of the Sanskrit may
antedate 2500 B.C., it may well be believed that people speaking the
Indo-European parent-speech belonged to a period as far back as 5000 B.C.,
or possibly earlier.

3. Stages in the Development of the Latin Language.--The earliest remains
of the Latin language are found in certain very archaic inscriptions. The
oldest of these belong to the sixth and seventh centuries B.C. Roman
literature does not begin till several centuries later, viz. shortly after
the middle of the third century B.C. We may recognize the following clearly
marked periods of the language and literature:

a. _The Preliterary Period_, from the earliest times down to 240 B.C., when
Livius Andronicus brought out his first play. For this period our knowledge
of Latin depends almost exclusively upon the scanty inscriptions that have
survived from this remote time. Few of these are of any length.

b. _The Archaic Period_, from Livius Andronicus (240 B.C.) to Cicero (81
B.C.). Even in this age the language had already become highly developed as
a medium of expression. In the hands of certain gifted writers it had even
become a vehicle of power and beauty. In its simplicity, however, it
naturally marks a contrast with the more finished diction of later days. To
this period belong:

  Livius Andronicus, about 275-204 B.C. (Translation of Homer's Odyssey;
      Tragedies).
  Plautus, about 250-184 B.C. (Comedies).
  Naevius, about 270-199 B.C. ("Punic War"; Comedies).
  Ennius, 239-169 B.C. ("Annals"; Tragedies).
  Terence, about 190-159 B.C. (Comedies).
  Lucilius, 180-103 B.C. (Satires).
  Pacuvius, 220-about 130 B.C. (Tragedies).
  Accius, 170-about 85 B.C. (Tragedies).

c. _The Golden Age_, from Cicero (81 B.C.) to the death of Augustus (14
A.D.). In this period the language, especially in the hands of Cicero,
reaches a high degree of stylistic perfection. Its vocabulary, however, has
not yet attained its greatest fullness and range. Traces of the diction of
the Archaic Period are often noticed, especially in the poets, who
naturally sought their effects by reverting to the speech of olden times.
Literature reached its culmination in this epoch, especially in the great
poets of the Augustan Age. The following writers belong here:

  Lucretius, about 95-55 B.C. (Poem on Epicurean Philosophy).
  Catullus, 87-about 54 B.C. (Poet).
  Cicero, 106-43 B.C. (Orations; Rhetorical Works; Philosophical Works;
      Letters).
  Caesar, 102-44 B.C. (Commentaries on Gallic and Civil Wars),
  Sallust, 86-36 B.C. (Historian).
  Nepos, about 100-about 30 B.C. (Historian).
  Virgil, 70-19 B.C. ("Aeneid"; "Georgics"; "Bucolics").
  Horace, 65-8 B.C. (Odes; Satires, Epistles).
  Tibullus, about 54-19 B.C. (Poet).
  Propertius, about 50-about 15 B.C. (Poet).
  Ovid, 43 B.C.-17 A.D. ("Metamorphoses" and other poems).
  Livy. 59 B.C.-17 A.D. (Historian).

d. _The Silver Latinity_, from the death of Augustus (14 A.D.) to the death
of Marcus Aurelius (180 A.D.), This period is marked by a certain reaction
against the excessive precision of the previous age. It had become the
practice to pay too much attention to standardized forms of expression, and
to leave too little play to the individual writer. In the healthy reaction
against this formalism, greater freedom of expression now manifests itself.
We note also the introduction of idioms from the colloquial language, along
with many poetical words and usages. The following authors deserve mention:

  Phaedrus, flourished about 40 A.D. (Fables in Verse)
  Velleius Paterculus, flourished about 30 A.D. (Historian).
  Lucan, 39-65 A.D. (Poem on the Civil War).
  Seneca, about 1-65 A.D. (Tragedies; Philosophical Works).
  Pliny the Elder, 23-79 A.D. ("Natural History").
  Pliny the Younger, 62-about 115 A.D. ("Letters").
  Martial, about 45-about 104 A.D. (Epigrams).
  Quintilian, about 35-about 100 A.D. (Treatise on Oratory and Education).
  Tacitus, about 55-about 118 A.D. (Historian).
  Juvenal, about 55-about 135 A.D. (Satirist).
  Suetonius, about 73-about 118 A.D. ("Lives of the Twelve Caesars").
  Minucius Felix, flourished about 160 A.D. (First Christian Apologist).
  Apuleius, 125-about 200 A.D. ("Metamorphoses," or "Golden Ass").

e. _The Archaizing Period._ This period is characterized by a conscious
imitation of the Archaic Period of the second and first centuries B.C.; it
overlaps the preceding period, and is of importance from a linguistic
rather than from a literary point of view. Of writers who manifest the
archaizing tendency most conspicuously may be mentioned Fronto, from whose
hand we have a collection of letters addressed to the Emperors Antoninus
Pius and Marcus Aurelius; also Aulus Gellius, author of the "Attic Nights."
Both of these writers flourished in the second half of the second century
A.D.

f. _The Period of the Decline_, from 180 to the close of literary activity
in the sixth century A.D. This period is characterized by rapid and radical
alterations in the language. The features of the conversational idiom of
the lower strata of society invade the literature, while in the remote
provinces, such as Gaul, Spain, Africa, the language suffers from the
incorporation of local peculiarities. Representative writers of this period
are:

  Tertullian, about 160-about 240 A.D. (Christian Writer).
  Cyprian, about 200-258 A.D. (Christian Writer).
  Lactantius, flourished about 300 A.D. (Defense of Christianity).
  Ausonius, about 310-about 395 A.D. (Poet).
  Jerome, 340-420 A.D. (Translator of the Scriptures).
  Ambrose, about 340-397 (Christian Father).
  Augustine, 354-430 (Christian Father--"City of God").
  Prudentius, flourished 400 A.D. (Christian Poet).
  Claudian, flourished 400 A.D. (Poet).
  Boëthius, about 480-524 A.D. ("Consolation of Philosophy ").

4. Subsequent History of the Latin Language.--After the sixth century A.D.
Latin divides into two entirely different streams. One of these is the
literary language maintained in courts, in the Church, and among scholars.
This was no longer the language of people in general, and as time went on,
became more and more artificial. The other stream is the colloquial idiom
of the common people, which developed ultimately in the provinces into the
modern so-called Romance idioms. These are the Italian, Spanish,
Portuguese, French, Provençal (spoken in Provence, i.e. southeastern
France), the Rhaeto-Romance (spoken in the Canton of the Grisons in
Switzerland), and the Roumanian, spoken in modern Roumania and adjacent
districts. All these Romance languages bear the same relation to the Latin
as the different groups of the Indo-European family of languages bear to
the parent speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART I.

       *       *       *       *       *

SOUNDS, ACCENT, QUANTITY.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE ALPHABET.

1. The Latin Alphabet is the same as the English, except that the Latin has
no w.

1. K occurs only in _Kalendae_ and a few other words; y and z were
introduced from the Greek about 50 B.C., and occur only in foreign
words--chiefly Greek.

2. With the Romans, who regularly employed only capitals, I served both as
vowel and consonant; so also V. For us, however, it is more convenient to
distinguish the vowel and consonant sounds, and to write i and u for the
former, j and v for the latter. Yet some scholars prefer to employ i and u
in the function of consonants as well as vowels.

CLASSIFICATION OF SOUNDS.

2. 1. The Vowels are a, e, i, o, u, y. The other letters are Consonants.
The Diphthongs are ae, oe, ei, au, eu, ui.

2. Consonants are further subdivided into Mutes, Liquids, Nasals, and
Spirants.

3. The Mutes are p, t, c, k, q; b, d, g; ph, th, ch. Of these,--

  a) p, t, c, k, q are voiceless,[4] i.e. sounded _without_ voice or
  vibration of the vocal cords.

  b) b, d, g are voiced,[5] i.e. sounded _with_ vibration of the vocal
  cords.

  c) ph, th, ch are aspirates. These are confined almost exclusively to
  words derived from the Greek, and were equivalent to p + h, t + h, c + h,
  i.e. to the corresponding voiceless mutes with a following breath, as in
  Eng. _loop-hole_, _hot-house_, _block-house_.

4. The Mutes admit of classification also as

  Labials,                        p, b, ph.
  Dentals (or Linguals),          t, d, th.
  Gutturals (or Palatals),        c, k, q, g, ch.

5. The Liquids are l, r. These sounds were voiced.

6. The Nasals are m, n. These were voiced. Besides its ordinary sound, n,
when followed by a guttural mute also had another sound,--that of ng in
_sing_,--the so-called n _adulterīnum_; as,--

  anceps, _double_, pronounced angceps.

7. The Spirants (sometimes called Fricatives) are f, s, h. These were
voiceless.

8. The Semivowels are j and v. These were voiced.

9. Double Consonants are x and z. Of these, x was equivalent to cs, while
the equivalence of z is uncertain. See § 3, 3.

10. The following table will indicate the relations of the consonant
sounds:--

                 VOICELESS.     VOICED.      ASPIRATES.
                     p,            b,           ph,       (Labials).
  Mutes,             t,            d,           th,       (Dentals).
                  c, k, q,         g,           ch,       (Gutturals).
  Liquids,                       l, r,
  Nasals,                        m, n,
                     f,                                   (Labial).
  Spirants,          s,                                   (Dental).
                     h,                                   (Guttural).
  Semivowels,                    j, v.

  a. The Double Consonants, x and z, being compound sounds, do not admit of
  classification in the above table.

SOUNDS OF THE LETTERS.

3. The following pronunciation (often called Roman) is substantially that
employed by the Romans at the height of their civilization; i.e., roughly,
from 50 B.C. to 50 A.D.

1. Vowels.

  ā as in _father_;          ă as in the first syllable _ahá_;
  ē as in _they_;            ĕ as in _met_;
  ī as in _machine_;         ĭ as in _pin_;
  ō as in _note_;            ŏ as in _obey_, _melody_;
  ū as in _rude_;            ŭ as in _put_;
  y like French _u_, German
  _ü_.

2. Diphthongs.

  ae like _ai_ in            eu with its two elements, ĕ and ŭ,
  _aisle_;                   pronounced in rapid succession;
  oe like _oi_ in _oil_;     ui occurs almost exclusively in
  ei as in _rein_;           _cui_ and _huic_. These words may
  au like _ow_ in _how_;     be pronounced as  though written
                             _kwee_ and _wheek_.

3. Consonants.

  b, d, f, h, k, l, m, n, p, qu are pronounced as in English, except that
  bs, bt are pronounced _ps_, _pt_.

  c is always pronounced as _k_.

  t is always a plain _t_, never with the sound of _sh_ as in Eng.
  _oration_.

  g always as in _get_; when ngu precedes a vowel, gu has the sound of
  _gw_, as in anguis, languidus.

  j has the sound of _y_ as in _yet_.

  r was probably slightly trilled with the tip of the tongue.

  s always voiceless as in _sin_; in suādeō, suāvis, suēscō, and in
  compounds and derivatives of these words, su has the sound of _sw_.

  v like _w_.

  x always like _ks_; never like Eng. _gz_ or _z_.

  z uncertain in sound; possibly like Eng. _zd_, possibly like _z_. The
  latter sound is recommended.

  The aspirates ph, ch, th were pronounced very nearly like our stressed
  Eng. _p_, c, _t_--so nearly so, that, for practical purposes, the latter
  sounds suffice.

  Doubled letters, like ll, mm, tt, etc., should be so pronounced that both
  members of the combination are distinctly articulated.

SYLLABLES.

4. There are as many syllables in a Latin word as there are separate vowels
and diphthongs.

In the division of words into syllables,--

1. A single consonant is joined to the following vowel; as, vo-lat, ge-rit,
pe-rit, a-dest.

2. Doubled consonants, like tt, ss, etc., are always separated; as, vit-ta,
mis-sus.

3. Other combinations of two or more consonants are regularly separated,
and the first consonant of the combination is joined with the preceding
vowel; as, ma-gis-trī, dig-nus, mōn-strum, sis-te-re.

4. An exception to Rule 3 occurs when the two consonants consist of a mute
followed by l or r (pl, cl, tl; pr, cr, tr, etc.). In such cases both
consonants are regularly joined to the following vowel; as, a-grī,
vo-lu-cris, pa-tris, mā-tris. Yet if the l or r introduces the second part
of a compound, the two consonants are separated; as, ab-rumpō, ad-lātus.

5. The double consonant x is joined to the preceding vowel; as, ax-is,
tēx-ī.

QUANTITY.

5. A. Quantity of Vowels.

A vowel is _long_ or _short_ according to the length of time required for
its pronunciation. No absolute rule can be given for determining the
quantity of Latin vowels. This knowledge must be gained, in large measure,
by experience; but the following principles are of aid:--

1. A vowel is long,[6]--

  a) before nf or ns; as, īnfāns, īnferior, cōnsūmō, cēnseō, īnsum.

  b) when the result of contraction; as, nīlum for nihilum.

2. A vowel is short,--

  a) before nt, nd; as, amant, amandus. A few exceptions occur in compounds
  whose first member has a long vowel; as, nōndum (nōn dum).

  b) before another vowel, or h; as, meus, trahō. Some exceptions occur,
  chiefly in proper names derived from the Greek; as, Aenēās.

B. Quantity of Syllables.

Syllables are distinguished as _long_ or _short_ according to the length of
time required for their pronunciation.

1. A syllable is long,[7]--

  a) if it contains a long vowel; as, māter, rēgnum, dīus.

  b) if it contains a diphthong; as, causae, foedus.

  c) if it contains a short vowel followed by x, z, or any two consonants
  (except a mute with l or r); as, axis, gaza, restō.

2. A syllable is short, if it contains a short vowel followed by a vowel or
by a single consonant; as, mea, amat.

3. Sometimes a syllable varies in quantity, _viz_. when its vowel is short
and is followed by a mute with l or r, i.e. by pl, cl, tl; pr, cr, tr,
etc.; as, ăgrī, volŭcris.[8] Such syllables are called _common_. In prose
they were regularly short, but in verse they might be treated as long at
the option of the poet.

NOTE.--These distinctions of _long_ and _short_ are not arbitrary and
artificial, but are purely natural. Thus, a syllable containing a short
vowel followed by two consonants, as ng, is long, because such a syllable
requires _more time_ for its pronunciation; while a syllable containing a
short vowel followed by one consonant is short, because it takes _less
time_ to pronounce it. In case of the common syllables, the mute and the
liquid blend so easily as to produce a combination which takes no more time
than a single consonant. Yet by separating the two elements (as ag-rī) the
poets were able to use such syllables as long.

ACCENT.

6. 1. Words of two syllables are accented upon the first; as, tégit,
mō´rem.

2. Words of more than two syllables are accented upon the penult (next to
the last) if that is a long syllable, otherwise upon the antepenult (second
from the last); as, amā´vī, amántis, míserum.

3. When the enclitics -que, -ne, -ve, -ce, -met, -dum are appended to
words, if the syllable preceding the enclitic is long (either originally or
as a result of adding the enclitic) it is accented; as, miserō´que,
hominísque. But if the syllable still remains short after the enclitic has
been added, it is not accented unless the word originally took the accent
on the antepenult. Thus, pórtaque; but míseráque.

4. Sometimes the final -e of -ne and -ce disappears, but without affecting
the accent; as, tantō´n, istī´c, illū´c.

5. In utră´que, _each_, and plēră´que, _most_, -que is not properly an
enclitic; yet these words accent the penult, owing to the influence of
their other cases,--utérque, utrúmque, plērúmque.

VOWEL CHANGES.[9]

7.. 1. In Compounds,

  a) ĕ before a single consonant becomes ĭ; as,--

    colligō     for con-legō.

  b) ă before a single consonant becomes ĭ: as,--

    adigō       for ad-agō.

  c) ă before two consonants becomes ē; as,--

    expers      for ex-pars.

  d) ae becomes ī; as,--

    conquīrō    for con-quaerō.

  e) au becomes ū, sometimes ō; as,--

    conclūdō    for con-claudō;
    explōdō     for ex-plaudō.

2. Contraction. Concurrent vowels were frequently contracted into one long
vowel. The first of the two vowels regularly prevailed; as,--

  trēs      for tre-es;         cōpia     for co-opia;
  mālō      for ma(v)elō;       cōgō      for co-agō;
  amāstī    for amā(v)istī;     cōmō      for co-emō;
  dēbeō     for dē(h)abeō;      jūnior    for ju(v)enior.
  nīl       for nihil;

3. Parasitic Vowels. In the environment of liquids and nasals a parasitic
vowel sometimes develops; as,--

  vinculum for earlier vinclum.

So perīculum, saeculum.

4. Syncope. Sometimes a vowel drops out by syncope; as,--

  ārdor for āridor (compare _āridus_);
  valdē for validē (compare _validus_).

CONSONANT CHANGES[10]

8. 1. Rhotacism. An original s between vowels became r; as,--

  arbōs, Gen. arboris (for arbosis);
  genus, Gen. generis (for genesis);
  dirimō (for dis-emō).

2. dt, tt, ts each give s or ss; as,--

  pēnsum for pend-tum;
  versum for vert-tum;
  mīles for mīlet-s;
  sessus for sedtus;
  passus for pattus.

3. Final consonants were often omitted; as,--

  cor for cord;
  lac for lact.

4. Assimilation of Consonants. Consonants are often assimilated to a
following sound. Thus: accurrō (adc-); aggerō (adg-); asserō (ads-);
allātus (adl-); apportō (adp-); attulī (adt-); arrīdeō (adr-); afferō
(adf-); occurrō (obc-); suppōnō (subp-); offerō (obf-); corruō (comr-);
collātus (coml-); etc.

5. Partial Assimilation. Sometimes the assimilation is only partial.
Thus:--

  a) b before s or t becomes p; as,--

    scrīpsī (scrīb-sī), scrīptum (scrīb-tum).

  b) g before s or t becomes c; as,--

    āctus (āg-tus).

  c) m before a dental or guttural becomes n; as,--

    eundem (eum-dem); prīnceps (prīm-ceps).

PECULIARITIES OF ORTHOGRAPHY.

9. Many words have variable orthography.

1. Sometimes the different forms belong to different periods of the
language. Thus, quom, voltus, volnus, volt, etc., were the prevailing forms
almost down to the Augustan age; after that, cum, vultus, vulnus, vult,
etc. So optumus, maxumus, lubet, lubīdō, etc. down to about the same era;
later, optimus, maximus, libet, libīdō, etc.

2. In some words the orthography varies at one and the same period of the
language. Examples are exspectō, expectō; exsistō, existō; epistula,
epistola; adulēscēns, adolēscēns; paulus, paullus; cottīdiē, cotīdiē; and,
particularly, prepositional compounds, which often made a concession to the
etymology in the spelling; as,--

  ad-gerō or aggerō;            ad-serō or asserō;
  ad-liciō or alliciō;          in-lātus or illātus;
  ad-rogāns or arrogāns;        sub-moveō or summoveō;
                       and many others.

3. Compounds of jaciō were usually written ēiciō, dēiciō, adiciō, obiciō,
etc., but were probably pronounced as though written adjiciō, objiciō, etc.

4. Adjectives and nouns in -quus, -quum; -vus, -vum; -uus, -uum preserved
the earlier forms in -quos, -quom; -vos, -vom; -uos, -uom, down through the
Ciceronian age; as, antīquos, antīquom; saevos; perpetuos; equos; servos.
Similarly verbs in the 3d plural present indicative exhibit the
terminations -quont, -quontur; -vont, -vontur; -uont, -uontur, for the same
period; as, relinquont, loquontur; vīvont, metuont.

The older spelling, while generally followed in editions of Plautus and
Terence, has not yet been adopted in our prose texts.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART II.

       *       *       *       *       *

INFLECTIONS.

       *       *       *       *       *

10. The Parts of Speech in Latin are the same as in English, viz. Nouns,
Adjectives, Pronouns, Verbs, Adverbs, Prepositions, Conjunctions, and
Interjections; but the Latin has no article.

11. Of these eight parts of speech the first four are capable of
Inflection, i.e. of undergoing change of form to express modifications of
meaning. In case of Nouns, Adjectives, and Pronouns, this process is called
Declension; in case of verbs, Conjugation.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER I.--_Declension._

A. NOUNS.

12. A Noun is the name of a _person_, _place_, _thing_, or _quality_; as,
Caesar, _Caesar_; Rōma, _Rome_; penna, _feather_; virtūs, _courage_.

1. Nouns are either Proper or Common. Proper nouns are permanent names of
persons or places; as, Caesar, Rōma. Other nouns are Common: as, penna,
virtūs.

2. Nouns are also distinguished as Concrete or Abstract.

  a) Concrete nouns are those which designate individual objects; as, mōns,
  _mountain_; pēs, _foot_; diēs, _day_; mēns, _mind_.

  Under concrete nouns are included, also, collective nouns; as, legiō,
  _legion_; comitātus, _retinue_.

  b) Abstract nouns designate qualities; as, cōnstantia, _steadfastness_;
  paupertās, _poverty_.

GENDER OF NOUNS.

13. There are three Genders,--Masculine, Feminine, and Neuter. Gender in
Latin is either natural or grammatical.

Natural Gender.

14. The gender of nouns is natural when it is based upon sex. Natural
gender is confined entirely to names of persons; and these are--

1. Masculine, if they denote males; as,--

  nauta, _sailor_; agricola, _farmer_.

2. Feminine, if they denote females; as,--

  māter, _mother_; rēgīna, _queen_.

Grammatical Gender.

15. Grammatical gender is determined not by sex, but by the general
signification of the word, or the ending of its Nominative Singular. By
grammatical gender, nouns denoting things or qualities are often Masculine
or Feminine, simply by virtue of their signification or the ending of the
Nominative Singular. The following are the general principles for
determining grammatical gender:--

_A. Gender determined by Signification._

1. Names of _Rivers_, _Winds_, and _Months_ are Masculine; as,--

  Sēquana, _Seine_; Eurus, _east wind_; Aprīlis, _April_.

2. Names of _Trees_, and such names of _Towns_ and _Islands_ as end in -us,
are Feminine; as,--

  quercus, _oak_; Corinthus, _Corinth_; Rhodus, _Rhodes_.

Other names of towns and islands follow the gender of their endings (see
_B_, below); as,--

  Delphī, n.; Leuctra, n.; Tībur, n.; Carthāgō, f.

3. Indeclinable nouns, also infinitives and phrases, are Neuter; as,--

  nihil, _nothing_; nefās, _wrong_; amāre, _to love_.

NOTE.--Exceptions to the above principles sometimes occur; as, Allia (the
river), f.

_B. Gender determined by Ending of Nominative Singular._

The gender of other nouns is determined by the ending of the Nominative
Singular.[11]

NOTE 1.--_Common Gender._ Certain nouns are sometimes Masculine, sometimes
Feminine. Thus, sacerdōs may mean either _priest_ or _priestess_, and is
Masculine or Feminine accordingly. So also cīvis, _citizen_; parēns,
_parent_; etc. The gender of such nouns is said to be _common_.

NOTE 2.--Names of animals usually have grammatical gender, according to the
ending of the Nominative Singular, but the one form may designate either
the male or female; as, ānser, m., _goose_ or _gander_. So vulpēs, f.,
_fox_; aquīla, f., _eagle_.

NUMBER.

16. The Latin has two Numbers,--the Singular and Plural. The Singular
denotes one object, the Plural, more than one.

CASES.

17. There are six Cases in Latin:--

  Nominative,     Case of Subject;
  Genitive,       Objective with _of_, or Possessive;
  Dative,         Objective with _to_ or _for_;
  Accusative,     Case of Direct Object;
  Vocative,       Case of Address;
  Ablative,       Objective with _by_, _from_, _in_,
                  _with_.

1. LOCATIVE. Vestiges of another case, the Locative (denoting place where),
occur in names of towns and in a few other words.

2. OBLIQUE CASES. The Genitive, Dative, Accusative, and Ablative are called
Oblique Cases.

3. STEM AND CASE-ENDINGS. The different cases are formed by appending
certain case-endings to a fundamental part called the Stem.[12] Thus,
_portam_ (Accusative Singular) is formed by adding the case-ending -m to
the stem porta-. But in most cases the final vowel of the stem has
coalesced so closely with the actual case-ending that the latter has become
more or less obscured. The _apparent case-ending_ thus resulting is called
a termination.

THE FIVE DECLENSIONS.

18. There are five Declensions in Latin, distinguished from each other by
the final letter of the Stem, and also by the Termination of the Genitive
Singular, as follows:--

  DECLENSION.     FINAL LETTER OF STEM.   GEN. TERMINATION.
  First           ā                       -ae
  Second          ŏ                       -ī
  Third           ĭ / Some consonant      -īs
  Fourth          ŭ                       -ūs
  Fifth           ē                       -ēī / -ĕī

Cases alike in Form.

19. 1. The Vocative is regularly like the Nominative, except in the
singular of nouns in -us of the Second Declension.

2. The Dative and Ablative Plural are always alike.

3. In Neuters the Accusative and Nominative are always alike, and in the
Plural end in -ă.

4. In the Third, Fourth, and Fifth Declensions, the Accusative Plural is
regularly like the Nominative.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST DECLENSION.

ā-Stems.

20. Pure Latin nouns of the First Declension regularly end, in the
Nominative Singular, in -ă, weakened from -ā, and are of the Feminine
Gender. They are declined as follows:--

                   Porta, _gate_; stem, portā-.

                            SINGULAR.
       CASES.                 MEANINGS.            TERMINATIONS.
  _Nom._  porta      _a gate_ (as subject)         -ă
  _Gen._  portae     _of a gate_                   -ae
  _Dat._  portae     _to_ or _for a gate_          -ae
  _Acc._  portam     _a gate_ (as object)          -am
  _Voc._  porta      _O gate!_                     -ă
  _Abl._  portā      _with, by, from, in a gate_   -ā

                             PLURAL.
  _Nom._  portae     _gates_ (as subject)          -ae
  _Gen._  portārum   _of gates_                    -ārum
  _Dat._  portīs     _to_ or _for gates_           -īs
  _Acc._  portās     _gates_ (as object)           -ās
  _Voc._  portae     _O gates!_                    -ae
  _Abl._  portīs     _with, by, from, in gates_    -īs

1. The Latin has no article, and porta may mean either _a gate_ or _the
gate_; and in the Plural, _gates_ or _the gates_.

Peculiarities of Nouns of the First Declension.

21. 1. EXCEPTIONS IN GENDER. Nouns denoting males are Masculine; as, nauta,
_sailor_; agricola, _farmer_; also, Hadria, _Adriatic Sea_.

2. Rare Case-Endings,--

  a) An old form of the Genitive Singular in -ās is preserved in the
  combination pater familiās, _father of a family_; also in māter familiās,
  fīlius familiās, fīlia familiās. But the regular form of the Genitive in
  -ae is also admissible in these expressions; as, pater familiae.

  b) In poetry a Genitive in -āī also occurs; as, aulāī.

  c) The Locative Singular ends in -ae; as, Rōmae, _at Rome_.

  d) A Genitive Plural in -um instead of -ārum sometimes occurs; as,
  Dardanidum instead of Dardanidārum. This termination -um is not a
  contraction of -ārum, but represents an entirely different case-ending.

  e) Instead of the regular ending -īs, we usually find -ābus in the Dative
  and Ablative Plural of dea, _goddess_, and fīlia, _daughter_, especially
  when it is important to distinguish these nouns from the corresponding
  forms of deus, _god_, and fīlius, _son_. A few other words sometimes have
  the same peculiarity; as, lībertābus (from līberta, _freedwoman_),
  equābus (_mares_), to avoid confusion with lībertīs (from lībertus,
  _freedman_) and equīs (from equus, _horse_).

Greek Nouns.

22. These end in -ē (Feminine); -ās and -ēs (Masculine). In the Plural they
are declined like regular Latin nouns of the First Declension. In the
Singular they are declined as follows:--

          Archiās,           Epitomē,           Comētēs, _comet_.
          _Archias_.         _epitome_.
  _Nom._  Archiās            epitomē            comētēs
  _Gen._  Archiae            epitomēs           comētae
  _Dat._  Archiae            epitomae           comētae
  _Acc._  Archiam (or -ān)   epitomēn           comētēn
  _Voc._  Archiā             epitomē            comētē (or -ă)
  _Abl._  Archiā             epitomē            comētē (or -ā)

1. But most Greek nouns in -ē become regular Latin nouns in -a, and are
declined like porta; as, grammatica, _grammar_; mūsica, _music_; rhētorica,
_rhetoric_.

2. Some other peculiarities occur, especially in poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

SECOND DECLENSION.

ŏ-Stems.

23. Pure Latin nouns of the Second Declension end in -us, -er, -ir,
Masculine; -um, Neuter. Originally -us in the Nominative of the Masculine
was -os; and -um of the Neuters -om. So also in the Accusative.

Nouns in -us and -um are declined as follows:--

          Hortus, _garden_;    Bellum, _war_;
          stem, hortŏ-.        stem, bellŏ-.
                     SINGULAR.
                       TERMINATION.         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  hortus       -us     bellum       -um
  _Gen._  hortī        -ī      bellī        -ī
  _Dat._  hortō        -ō      bellō        -ō
  _Acc._  hortum       -um     bellum       -um
  _Voc._  horte        -e      bellum       -um
  _Abl._  hortō        -ō      bellō        -ō

                      PLURAL.
  _Nom._  hortī        -ī      bella        -a
  _Gen._  hortōrum     -ōrum   bellōrum     -ōrum
  _Dat._  hortīs       -īs     bellīs       -īs
  _Acc._  hortōs       -ōs     bella        -a
  _Voc._  hortī        -ī      bella        -a
  _Abl._  hortīs       -īs     bellīs       -īs

Nouns in -er and -ir are declined as follows:--

          Puer, _boy_;     Ager, _field_;  Vir, _man_;
          stem, puerŏ-     stem, agrŏ-     stem, virŏ-
                         SINGULAR.                         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  puer             ager            vir               Wanting
  _Gen._  puerī            agrī            virī            -ī
  _Dat._  puerō            agrō            virō            -ō
  _Acc._  puerum           agrum           virum           -um
  _Voc._  puer             ager            vir               Wanting
  _Abl._  puerō            agrō            virō            -ō

                          PLURAL.
  _Nom._  puerī            agrī            virī            -ī
  _Gen._  puerōrum         agrōrum         virōrum         -ōrum
  _Dat._  puerīs           agrīs           virīs           -īs
  _Acc._  puerōs           agrōs           virōs           -ōs
  _Voc._  puerī            agrī            virī            -ī
  _Abl._  puerīs           agrīs           virīs           -īs

1. Note that in words of the type of puer and vir the final vowel of the
stem has disappeared in the Nominative and Vocative Singular.

In the Nominative and Vocative Singular of ager, the stem is further
modified by the development of e before r.

2. The following nouns in -er are declined like puer: adulter, _adulterer_;
gener, _son-in-law_; Līber, _Bacchus_; socer, _father-in-law_; vesper,
_evening_; and compounds in -fer and -ger, as signifer, armiger.

Nouns in _-vus_, _-vum_, _-quus_.

24. Nouns ending in the Nominative Singular in -vus, -vum, -quus, exhibited
two types of inflection in the classical Latin,--an earlier and a
later,--as follows:--

   _Earlier Inflection (including Caesar and Cicero)._
          Servos, m.,     Aevom, n.,      Equos, m.,
          _slave_.        _age_.          _horse_.
                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  servos          aevom           equos
  _Gen._  servī           aevī            equī
  _Dat._  servō           aevō            equō
  _Acc._  servom          aevom           equom
  _Voc._  serve           aevom           eque
  _Abl._  servō           aevō            equō

            _Later inflection (after Cicero)._
                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  servus          aevum           equus
  _Gen._  servī           aevī            equī
  _Dat._  servō           aevō            equō
  _Act._  servum          aevum           equum
  _Voc._  serve           aevum           eque
  _Abl._  servō           aevō            equō

1. The Plural of these nouns is regular, and always uniform.

Peculiarities of Inflection in the Second Declension.

25. 1. Proper names in -ius regularly form the Genitive Singular in -ī
(instead of -iī), and the Vocative Singular in -ī (for -ie); as Vergílī,
_of Virgil_, or _O Virgil_ (instead of Vergiliī, Vergilie). In such words
the accent stands upon the penult, even though that be short. Nouns in
-ajus, -ejus form the Gen. in -aī, -eī, as Pompejus, Pompeī.

2. Nouns in -ius and -ium, until after the beginning of the reign of
Augustus (31 B.C.), regularly formed the Genitive Singular in -i (instead
of -iī); as,--

  _Nom._  ingenium        fīlius
  _Gen._  ingénī          fīlī

These Genitives accent the penult, even when it is short.

3. Fīlius forms the Vocative Singular in -ī (for -ie); _viz_. fīlī, _O
son!_

4. Deus, _god_, lacks the Vocative Singular. The Plural is inflected as
follows:--

  _Nom._  dī              (deī)
  _Gen._  deōrum          (deum)
  _Dat._  dīs             (deīs)
  _Acc._  deōs
  _Voc._  dī              (deī)
  _Abl._  dīs             (deīs)

5. The Locative Singular ends in -ī; as, Corinthī, _at Corinth_.

6. The Genitive Plural has -um, instead of -ōrum,--

  a) in words denoting money and measure; as, talentum, _of talents_;
  modium, _of pecks_; sēstertium, _of sesterces_.

  b) in duumvir, triumvir, decemvir; as, duumvirum.

  c) sometimes in other words; as, līberum, _of the children_; socium, _of
  the allies_.

Exceptions to Gender in the Second Declension.

26. 1. The following nouns in -us are Feminine by exception:--

  a) Names of towns, islands, trees--according to the general rule laid
  down in § 15, 2; also some names of countries; as Aegyptus, _Egypt_.

  b) Five special words,--

    alvus, _belly_;
    carbasus, _flax_;
    colus, _distaff_;
    humus, _ground_;
    vannus, _winnowing-fan_.

  c) A few Greek Feminines; as,--

    atomus, _atom_;
    diphthongus, _diphthong_.

2. The following nouns in -us are Neuter:--

  pelagus, _sea_;
  vīrus, _poison_;
  vulgus, _crowd_.

Greek Nouns of the Second Declension.

27. These end in -os, -ōs, Masculine or Feminine; and -on, Neuter. They are
mainly proper names, and are declined as follows:--

          Barbitos, m.    Androgeōs, m.,  Īlion, n.,
          and f.,         _Androgeos._    _Troy._
          _lyre._
  _Nom._  barbitos        Androgeōs       Īlion
  _Gen._  barbitī         Androgeō, -ī    Īliī
  _Dat._  barbitō         Androgeō        Īliō
  _Acc._  barbiton        Androgeō, -ōn   Īlion
  _Voc._  barbite         Androgeōs       Īlion
  _Abl._  barbitō         Androgeō        Īliō

1. Nouns in -os sometimes form the Accusative Singular in -um instead of
-on; as, Dēlum, _Delos_.

2. The Plural of Greek nouns, when it occurs, is usually regular.

3. For other rare forms of Greek nouns the lexicon may be consulted.

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRD DECLENSION.

28. Nouns of the Third Declension end in -a, -e, -ī, -ō, -y, -c, -l, -n,
-r, -s, -t, -x. The Third Declension includes several distinct classes of
Stems,--

    I.  Pure Consonant-Stems.
   II.  ĭ-Stems.
  III.  Consonant-Stems which have partially adapted themselves to the
        inflection of ĭ-Stems.
   IV.  A very few stems ending in a long vowel or a diphthong.
    V.  Irregular Nouns.

I. Consonant-Stems.

29. 1. In these the stem appears in its unaltered form in all the oblique
cases, so that the actual case-endings may be clearly recognized.

2. Consonant-Stems fall into several natural subdivisions, according as the
stem ends in a Mute, Liquid, Nasal, or Spirant.

_A. Mute-Stems._

30. Mute-Stems may end,--

1. In a Labial (p); as, prīncep-s.

2. In a Guttural (g or c); as, rēmex (rēmeg-s); dux (duc-s).

3. In a Dental (d or t); as, lapis (lapid-s); mīles (mīlet-s).

1. STEMS IN A LABIAL MUTE (p).

31. Prīnceps, m., _chief_.

          SINGULAR.       TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  prīnceps        -s
  _Gen._  prīncipis       -is
  _Dat._  prīncipī        -ī
  _Acc._  prīncipem       -em
  _Voc._  prīnceps        -s
  _Abl._  prīncipe        -e

          PLURAL.
  _Nom._  prīncipēs       -ēs
  _Gen._  prīncipum       -um
  _Dat._  prīncipibus     -ibus
  _Acc._  prīncipēs       -ēs
  _Voc._  prīncipēs       -ēs
  _Abl._  prīncipibus     -ibus

2. STEMS IN A GUTTURAL MUTE (g, c).

32. In these the termination -s of the Nominative Singular unites with the
guttural, thus producing -x.

              Rēmex, m., _rower_.              Dux, c., _leader_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  rēmex           rēmigēs         dux             ducēs
  _Gen._  rēmigis         rēmigum         ducis           ducum
  _Dat._  rēmigī          rēmigibus       ducī            ducibus
  _Acc._  rēmigem         rēmigēs         ducem           ducēs
  _Voc._  rēmex           rēmigēs         dux             ducēs
  _Abl._  rēmige          rēmigibus       duce            ducibus

3. STEMS IN A DENTAL MUTE (d, t).

33. In these the final d or t of the stem disappears in the Nominative
Singular before the ending -s.

              Lapis, m., _stone_.            Mīles, m., _soldier_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  lapis           lapidēs         mīles           mīlitēs
  _Gen._  lapidis         lapidum         mīlitis         mīlitum
  _Dat._  lapidī          lapidibus       mīlitī          mīlitibus
  _Acc._  lapidem         lapidēs         mīlitem         mīlitēs
  _Voc._  lapis           lapidēs         mīles           mīlitēs
  _Abl._  lapide          lapidibus       mīlite          mīlitibus

_B. Liquid Stems._

34. These end in -l or -r.

          Vigil, m.,      Victor, m.,     Aequor, n.,
          _watchman_.     _conqueror_.    _sea_.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  vigil           victor          aequor
  _Gen._  vigilis         victōris        aequoris
  _Dat._  vigilī          victōrī         aequorī
  _Acc._  vigilem         victōrem        aequor
  _Voc._  vigil           victor          aequor
  _Abl._  vigile          victōre         aequore

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  vigilēs         victōrēs        aequora
  _Gen._  vigilum         victōrum        aequorum
  _Dat._  vigilibus       victōribus      aequoribus
  _Acc._  vigilēs         victōrēs        aequora
  _Voc._  vigilēs         victōrēs        aequora
  _Abl._  vigilibus       victōribus      aequoribus

1. Masculine and Feminine stems ending in a liquid form the Nominative and
Vocative Singular without termination.

2. The termination is also lacking in the Nominative, Accusative and
Vocative Singular of all neuters of the Third Declension.

_C. Nasal Stems._

35. These end in -n,[13] which often disappears in the Nom. Sing.

                Leō, m., _lion_.               Nōmen, n., _name_
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  leō             leōnēs          nōmen           nōmina
  _Gen._  leōnis          leōnum          nōminis         nōminum
  _Dat._  leōnī           leōnibus        nōminī          nōminibus
  _Acc._  leōnem          leōnēs          nōmen           nōmina
  _Voc._  leō             leōnēs          nōmen           nōmina
  _Abl._  leōne           leōnibus        nōmine          nōminibus

_D. s-Stems._


36.       Mōs, m.         Genus, n.,      Honor, m.,
          _custom_.       _race_.         _honor_.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  mōs             genus           honor
  _Gen._  mōris           generis         honōris
  _Dat._  mōrī            generī          honōrī
  _Acc._  mōrem           genus           honōrem
  _Voc._  mōs             genus           honor
  _Abl._  mōre            genere          honōre

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  mōrēs           genera          honōrēs
  _Gen._  mōrum           generum         honōrum
  _Dat._  mōribus         generibus       honōribus
  _Acc._  mōrēs           genera          honōrēs
  _Voc._  mōrēs           genera          honōrēs
  _Abl._  mōribus         generibus       honōribus

1. Note that the final s of the stem becomes r (between vowels) in the
oblique cases. In many words (honor, color, and the like) the r of the
oblique cases has, by analogy, crept into the Nominative, displacing the
earlier s, though the forms honōs, colōs, etc., also occur, particularly in
early Latin and in poetry.

II. ĭ-Stems.

_A. Masculine and Feminine ĭ-Stems._

37. These regularly end in -is in the Nominative Singular, and always have
-ium in the Genitive Plural. Originally the Accusative Singular ended in
-im, the Ablative Singular in -ī, and the Accusative Plural in -īs; but
these endings have been largely displaced by -em, -e, and -ēs, the endings
of Consonant-Stems.


38.       Tussis, f.,     Īgnis, m.,      Hostis, c.,
          _cough_; stem,  _fire_; stem,   _enemy_; stem,
          tussi-.         īgni-.          hosti-.

                        SINGULAR.                         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  tussis          īgnis           hostis          -is
  _Gen._  tussis          īgnis           hostis          -is
  _Dat._  tussī           īgnī            hostī           -ī
  _Acc._  tussim          īgnem           hostem          -im, -em
  _Voc._  tussis          īgnis           hostis          -is
  _Abl._  tussī           īgnī or e       hoste           -ī, -e

                               PLURAL.
  _Nom._  tussēs          īgnēs           hostēs          -ēs
  _Gen._  tussium         īgnium          hostium         -ium
  _Dat._  tussibus        īgnibus         hostibus        -ibus
  _Acc._  tussīs or -ēs   īgnīs or -ēs    hostīs or -ēs   -īs, -ēs
  _Voc._  tussēs          īgnēs           hostēs          -ēs
  _Abl._  tussibus        īgnibus         hostibus        -ibus

1. To the same class belong--

   apis, _bee_.            crātis, _hurdle_.      †*secūris, _axe_.
   auris, _ear_.          *febris, _fever_.         sēmentis, _sowing_.
   avis, _bird_.           orbis, _circle_.       †*sitis, _thirst_.
   axis, _axle_.           ovis, _sheep_.           torris, _brand_.
  *būris, _plough-beam_.   pelvis, _basin_.       †*turris, _tower_.
   clāvis, _key_.          puppis, _stern_.         trudis, _pole_.
   collis, _hill_.         restis, _rope_.          vectis, _lever_.
                           and many others.

Words marked with a star regularly have Acc. -im; those marked with a †
regularly have Abl. -ī. Of the others, many at times show -im and -ī. Town
and river names in -is regularly have -im, -ī.

2. Not all nouns in -is are ĭ-Stems. Some are genuine consonant-stems, and
have the regular consonant terminations throughout, notably, canis, _dog_;
juvenis, _youth_.[14]

3. Some genuine ĭ-Stems have become disguised in the Nominative Singular;
as, pars, _part_, for par(ti)s; anas, _duck_, for ana(ti)s; so also mors,
_death_; dōs, _dowry_; nox, _night_; sors, _lot_; mēns, _mind_; ars, _art_;
gēns, _tribe_; and some others.

_B. Neuter ĭ-Stems._

39. These end in the Nominative Singular in -e, -al, and -ar. They always
have -ī in the Ablative Singular, -ia in the Nominative, Accusative, and
Vocative Plural, and -ium in the Genitive Plural, thus holding more
steadfastly to the i-character than do Masculine and Feminine ĭ-Stems.

          Sedile,         Animal,         Calcar,
          _seat_;         _animal_;       _spur_;
          stem, sedīli-.  stem,           stem,
                          animāli-.       calcāri-.

                        SINGULAR.                         TERMINATION.
  _Nom._  sedīle          animal          calcar          -e or wanting
  _Gen._  sedīlis         animālis        calcāris        -is
  _Dat._  sedīlī          animālī         calcārī         -ī
  _Acc._  sedīle          animal          calcar          -e or wanting
  _Voc._  sedīle          animal          calcar          -e or wanting
  _Abl._  sedīlī          animālī         calcārī         -ī

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  sedīlia         animālia        calcāria        -ia
  _Gen._  sedīlium        animālium       calcārium       -ium
  _Dat._  sedīlibus       animālibus      calcāribus      -ibus
  _Acc._  sedīlia         animālia        calcāria        -ia
  _Voc._  sedīlia         animālia        calcāria        -ia
  _Abl._  sedīlibus       animālibus      calcāribus      -ibus

1. In most words of this class the final -i of the stem is lost in the
Nominative Singular; in others it appears as -e.

2. Proper names in -e form the Ablative Singular in -e; as, Sōracte, _Mt.
Soracte_; so also sometimes mare, _sea_.

III. Consonant-Stems that have partially adapted themselves
to the Inflection of _ĭ_-Stems.

40. Many Consonant-Stems have so far adapted themselves to the inflection
of ĭ-stems as to take -ium in the Genitive Plural, and -īs in the
Accusative Plural. Their true character as Consonant-Stems, however, is
shown by the fact that they never take -im in the Accusative Singular, or
-ī in the Ablative Singular. The following words are examples of this
class:--

          Caedēs, f.,     Arx, f.,        Linter, f.,
          _slaughter_;    _citadel_;      _skiff_;
          stem, caed-.    stem, arc-.     stem, lintr-.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  caedēs          arx             linter
  _Gen._  caedis          arcis           lintris
  _Dat._  caedī           arcī            lintrī
  _Acc._  caedem          arcem           lintrem
  _Voc._  caedēs          arx             linter
  _Abl._  caede           arce            lintre

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  caedēs          arcēs           lintrēs
  _Gen._  caedium         arcium          lintrium
  _Dat._  caedibus        arcibus         lintribus
  _Acc._  caedēs, -īs     arcēs, -īs      lintrēs, -īs
  _Voc._  caedēs          arcēs           lintrēs
  _Abl._  caedibus        arcibus         lintribus

1. The following classes of nouns belong here:--

  a) Nouns in -ēs, with Genitive in -is; as, nūbēs, aedēs, clādēs, etc.

  b) Many monosyllables in -s or -x preceded by one or more consonants; as,
  urbs, mōns, stirps, lanx.

  c) Most nouns in -ns and -rs as, cliēns, cohors.

  d) Ūter, venter; fūr, līs, mās, mūs, nix; and the Plurals faucēs,
  penātēs, Optimātēs, Samnitēs, Quirītēs.

  e) Sometimes nouns in -tās with Genitive -tātis; as, cīvitās, aetās.
  Cīvitās _usually_ has cīvitātium.

IV. Stems in _-ī_, _-ū_, and Diphthongs.


41.       Vis, f.,        Sūs, c.,        Bōs, c., _ox_,  Juppiter, m.,
          _force_;        _swine_;        _cow_;          _Jupiter_;
          stem, vī-.      stem, sū-.      stem, bou-.     stem, Jou-.

                                SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  vīs             sūs             bōs             Juppiter
  _Gen._  ----            suis            bovis           Jovis
  _Dat._  ----            suī             bovī            Jovī
  _Acc._  vim             suem            bovem           Jovem
  _Voc._  vīs             sūs             bōs             Juppiter
  _Abl._  vī              sue             bove            Jove

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  vīrēs           suēs            bovēs
  _Gen._  vīrium          suum            bovum, boum
  _Dat._  vīribus         suibus, subus   bōbus, būbus
  _Acc._  vīrēs           suēs            bovēs
  _Voc._  vīrēs           suēs            bovēs
  _Abl._  vīribus         suibus, subus   bōbus, būbus

1. Notice that the oblique cases of sūs have ŭ in the root syllable.

2. Grūs is declined like sūs, except that the Dative and Ablative Plural
are always gruibus.

3. Juppiter is for Jou-pater, and therefore contains the same stem as in
Jov-is, Jov-ī, etc.

Nāvis was originally a diphthong stem ending in au-, but it has passed over
to the ĭ-stems (§ 37). Its ablative often ends in -ī.

V. Irregular Nouns.


42.       Senex, m.,      Carō, f.,       Os, n.,
          _old man_.      _flesh_.        _bone_.

                        SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  senex           carō            os
  _Gen._  senis           carnis          ossis
  _Dat._  senī            carnī           ossī
  _Acc._  senem           carnem          os
  _Voc._  senex           carō            os
  _Abl._  sene            carne           osse

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  senēs           carnēs          ossa
  _Gen._  senum           carnium         ossium
  _Dat._  senibus         carnibus        ossibus
  _Acc._  senēs           carnēs          ossa
  _Voc._  senēs           carnēs          ossa
  _Abl._  senibus         carnibus        ossibus

1. Iter, itineris, n., _way_, is inflected regularly throughout from the
stem itiner-.

2. Supellex, supellectilis, f., _furniture_, is confined to the Singular.
The oblique cases are formed from the stem supellectil-. The ablative has
both -ī and -e.

3. Jecur, n., _liver_, forms its oblique cases from two stems,--jecor- and
jecinor-. Thus, Gen. jecoris or jecinoris.

4. Femur, n., _thigh_, usually forms its oblique cases from the stem
femor-, but sometimes from the stem femin-. Thus, Gen. femoris or feminis.

General Principles of Gender in the Third Declension.

43. 1. Nouns in -ō, -or, -ōs, -er, -ĕs are Masculine.

2. Nouns in -ās, -ēs, -is, -ys, -x, -s (preceded by a consonant); -dō, -gō
(Genitive -inis); -iō (abstract and collective), -ūs (Genitive -ātis or
-ūdis) are Feminine.

3. Nouns ending in -a, -e, -i, -y, -o, -l, -n, -t, -ar, -ur, -ŭs are
Neuter.

Chief Exceptions to Gender in the Third Declension.

44. Exceptions to the Rule for Masculines.

1. Nouns in -ō.

  a. Feminine: carō, _flesh_.

2. Nouns in -or.

  a. Feminine: arbor, _tree_.

  b. Neuter: aequor, _sea_; cor, _heart_; marmor, _marble_.

3. Nouns in -ōs.

  a. Feminine: dōs, _dowry_.

  b. Neuter: ōs (ōris), _mouth_.

4. Nouns in -er.

  a. Feminine: linter, _skiff_.

  b. Neuter: cadāver, _corpse_; iter, _way_; tūber, _tumor_; ūber, _udder_.
  Also botanical names in -er; as, acer, _maple_.

5. Nouns in -ĕs.

  a. Feminine: seges, _crop_.

45. Exceptions to the Rule for Feminines.

1. Nouns in -ās.

  a. Masculine: vās, _bondsman_.

  b. Neuter: vās, _vessel_.

2. Nouns in -ēs.

  a. Masculine: ariēs, _ram_; pariēs, _wall_; pēs, _foot_.

3. Nouns in -is.

  a. Masculine: all nouns in -nis and -guis; as, amnis, _river_; īgnis,
  _fire_; pānis, _bread_; sanguis, _blood_; unguis, _nail_.

  Also--

  axis, _axle_.           piscis, _fish_.
  collis, _hill_.         postis, _post_.
  fascis, _bundle_.       pulvis, _dust_.
  lapis, _stone_.         orbis, _circle_.
  mēnsis, _month_.        sentis, _brier_.

4. Nouns in -x.

  a. Masculine: apex, _peak_; cōdex, _tree-trunk_; grex, _flock_; imbrex,
  _tile_; pollex, _thumb_; vertex, _summit_; calix, _cup_.

5. Nouns in -s preceded by a consonant.

  a. Masculine: dēns, _tooth_; fōns, _fountain_; mōns, _mountain_; pōns,
  _bridge_.

6. Nouns in -dō.

  a. Masculine: cardō, _hinge_; ōrdō, _order_.

46. Exceptions to the Rule for Neuters.

1. Nouns in -l.

  a. Masculine: sōl, _sun_; sāl, _salt_.

2. Nouns in -n.

  a. Masculine: pecten, _comb_.

3. Nouns in -ur.

  a. Masculine: vultur, _vulture_.

4. Nouns in -ŭs.

  a. Masculine: lepus, _hare_.

Greek Nouns of the Third Declension.

47. The following are the chief peculiarities of these:--

1. The ending -ă in the Accusative Singular; as, aetheră, _aether_;
Salamīnă, _Salamis_.

2. The ending -ĕs in the Nominative Plural; as, Phrygĕs, _Phrygians_.

3. The ending -ăs in the Accusative Plural; as, Phrygăs, _Phrygians_.

4. Proper names in -ās (Genitive -antis) have -ā in the Vocative Singular;
as, Atlās (Atlantis), Vocative Atlā, _Atlas_.

5. Neuters in -ma (Genitive -matis) have -īs instead of -ibus in the Dative
and Ablative Plural; as, poēmatīs, _poems_.

6. Orpheus, and other proper names ending in -eus, form the Vocative
Singular in -eu (Orpheu, etc.). But in prose the other cases usually follow
the second declension; as, Orpheī, Orpheō, etc.

7. Proper names in -ēs, like Periclēs, form the Genitive Singular sometimes
in -is, sometimes in -ī, as, Periclis or Periclī.

8. Feminine proper names in -ō have -ūs in the Genitive, but -ō in the
other oblique cases; as,--

  _Nom._  Didō            _Acc._  Didō
  _Gen._  Didūs           _Voc._  Didō
  _Dat._  Didō            _Abl._  Didō

9. The regular Latin endings often occur in Greek nouns.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOURTH DECLENSION.

_ŭ_-Stems.

48. Nouns of the Fourth Declension end in -us Masculine, and -ū Neuter.
They are declined as follows:--

             Frūctus, m., _fruit_.             Cornū, n., _horn_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  frūctus         frūctūs         cornū           cornua
  _Gen._  frūctūs         frūctuum        cornūs          cornuum
  _Dat._  frūctuī         frūctibus       cornū           cornibus
  _Acc._  frūctum         frūctūs         cornū           cornua
  _Voc._  frūctus         frūctūs         cornū           cornua
  _Abl._  frūctū          frūctibus       cornū           cornibus

Peculiarities of Nouns of the Fourth Declension.

49. 1. Nouns in -us, particularly in early Latin, often form the Genitive
Singular in -ī, following the analogy of nouns in -us of the Second
Declension; as, senātī, ōrnātī. This is usually the case in Plautus and
Terence.

2. Nouns in -us sometimes have -ū in the Dative Singular, instead of -uī;
as, frūctū (for frūctuī).

3. The ending -ubus, instead of -ibus, occurs in the Dative and Ablative
Plural of artūs (Plural), _limbs_; tribus, _tribe_; and in dis-syllables in
-cus; as, artubus, tribubus, arcubus, lacubus. But with the exception of
tribus, all these words admit the forms in -ibus as well as those in -ubus.

4. Domus, _house_, is declined according to the Fourth Declension, but has
also the following forms of the Second:--

  domī (locative), _at home_;
  domō, _from home_;
  domum, _homewards_, _to one's home_;
  domōs, _homewards_, _to their_ (etc.) _homes_

5. The only Neuters of this declension in common use are: cornū, _horn_;
genū, _knee_; and verū, _spit_.

Exceptions to Gender in the Fourth Declension.

50. The following nouns in -us are Feminine: acus, _needle_; domus,
_house_; manus, _hand_; porticus, _colonnade_; tribus, _tribe_; Īdūs
(Plural), _Ides_; also names of trees (§ 15, 2).

       *       *       *       *       *

FIFTH DECLENSION.

ē-Stems.

51. Nouns of the Fifth Declension end in -ēs, and are declined as
follows:--

                Diēs, m., _day_.               Rēs, f., _thing_.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.         SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Nom._  diēs            diēs            rēs             rēs
  _Gen._  diēī            diērum          rĕī             rērum
  _Dat._  diēī            diēbus          rĕī             rēbus
  _Acc._  diem            diēs            rem             rēs
  _Voc._  diēs            diēs            rēs             rēs
  _Abl._  diē             diēbus          rē              rēbus

Peculiarities of Nouns of the Fifth Declension.

52. 1. The ending of the Genitive and Dative Singular is -ĕī, instead of
-ēī, when a consonant precedes; as, spĕī, rĕī, fidĕī.

2. A Genitive ending -ī (for -ĕī) is found in plēbī (from plēbēs = plēbs)
in the expressions tribūnus plēbī, _tribune of the people_, and plēbī
scītum, _decree of the people_; sometimes also in other words.

3. A Genitive and Dative form in -ē sometimes occurs; as, aciē.

4. With the exception of diēs and rēs, most nouns of the Fifth Declension
are not declined in the Plural. But aciēs, seriēs, speciēs, spēs, and a few
others are used in the Nominative and Accusative Plural.

Gender in the Fifth Declension.

53. Nouns of the Fifth Declension are regularly Feminine, except diēs,
_day_, and merīdiēs, _mid-day_. But diēs is sometimes Feminine in the
Singular, particularly when it means an _appointed day_.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEFECTIVE NOUNS.

54. Here belong--

  1. Nouns used in the Singular only.

  2. Nouns used in the Plural only.

  3. Nouns used only in certain cases.

  4. Indeclinable Nouns.

Nouns used in the Singular only.

55. Many nouns, from the nature of their signification, are regularly used
in the Singular only. Thus:--

1. Proper names; as, Cicerō, _Cicero_; Italia, _Italy_.

2. Nouns denoting material; as, aes, _copper_; lac, _milk_.

3. Abstract nouns; as, ignōrantia, _ignorance_; bonitās, _goodness_.

4. But the above classes of words are sometimes used in the Plural. Thus:--

  a) Proper names,--to denote different members of a family, or specimens
  of a type; as, Cicerōnēs, _the Ciceros_; Catōnēs, _men like Cato_.

  b) Names of materials,--to denote objects made of the material, or
  different kinds of the substance; as, aera, _bronzes_ (i.e. bronze
  figures); ligna, _woods_.

  c) Abstract nouns,--to denote instances of the quality; as, ignōrantiae,
  _cases of ignorance_.

Nouns used in the Plural only.

56. Here belong--

1. Many geographical names; as, Thēbae, _Thebes_; Leuctra, _Leuctra_;
Pompejī, _Pompeii_.

2. Many names of festivals; as, Megalēsia, _the Megalesian festival_.

3. Many special words, of which the following are the most important:--

  angustiae, _narrow pass_.       mānēs, _spirits of the
  arma, _weapons_.                dead_.
  dēliciae, _delight_.            moenia, _city walls_.
  dīvitiae, _riches_.             minae, _threats_.
  Īdūs, _Ides_.                   nūptiae, _marriage_.
  indūtiae, _truce_.              posterī, _descendants_.
  īnsidiae, _ambush_.             reliquiae, _remainder_.
  majōrēs, _ancestors_.           tenebrae, _darkness_.
                                  verbera, _blows_.

Also in classical prose regularly--

  cervīcēs, _neck_.               nārēs, _nose_.
  fidēs, _lyre_.                  vīscerā, _viscera_.

Nouns used only in Certain Cases.

57. 1. Used in only One Case. Many nouns of the Fourth Declension are found
only in the Ablative Singular as, jussū, _by the order_; injussū, _without
the order_; nātū, _by birth_.

2. Used in Two Cases.

  a. Fors (_chance_), Nom. Sing.; forte, Abl. Sing.

  b. Spontis (_free-will_), Gen. Sing.; sponte, Abl. Sing.

3. Used in Three Cases. Nēmō, _no one_ (Nom.), has also the Dat. nēminī and
the Acc. nēminem. The Gen. and Abl. are supplied by the corresponding cases
of nūllus; viz. nūllīus and nūllō.

4. Impetus has the Nom., Acc., and Abl. Sing., and the Nom. and Acc. Plu.;
viz. impetus, impetum, impetū, impetūs.


5. a. Precī, precem, prece, lacks the Nom. and Gen. Sing.

  b. Vicis, vicem, vice, lacks the Nom. and Dat. Sing.

6. Opis, dapis, and frūgis,--all lack the Nom. Sing.

7. Many monosyllables of the Third Declension lack the Gen. Plu.: as, cor,
lūx, sōl, aes, ōs (ōris), rūs, sāl, tūs.

Indeclinable Nouns.

58. Here belong--

  fās, n., _right_.               nefās, n., _impiety_.
  īnstar, n., _likeness_.         nihil, n., _nothing_.
  māne, n., _morning_.            secus, n., _sex_.

1. With the exception of māne (which may serve also as Ablative, _in the
morning_), the nouns in this list are simply Neuters confined in use to the
Nominative and Accusative Singular.

Heteroclites.

59. These are nouns whose forms are partly of one declension, and partly of
another. Thus:--

1. Several nouns have the entire Singular of one declension, while the
Plural is of another; as,--

  vās, vāsis (_vessel_);     Plu., vāsa, vāsorōum, vāsīs, etc.
  jūgerum, jūgerī (_acre_);  Plu., jūgera, jūgerum, jūgeribus, etc.

2. Several nouns, while belonging in the main to one declension, have
certain special forms belonging to another. Thus:--

  a) Many nouns of the First Declension ending in -ia take also a Nom. and
  Acc. of the Fifth; as, māteriēs, māteriem, _material_, as well as
  māteria, māteriam.

  b) Famēs, _hunger_, regularly of the Third Declension, has the Abl. famē
  of the Fifth.

  c) Requiēs, requiētis, _rest_, regularly of the Third Declension, takes
  an Acc. of the Fifth, requiem, in addition to requiētem.

  d) Besides plēbs, plēbis, _common people_, of the Third Declension, we
  find plēbēs, plēbĕī (also plēbī, see § 52, 2), of the Fifth.

Heterogeneous Nouns.

60. Heterogeneous nouns vary in Gender. Thus:--

1. Several nouns of the Second Declension have two forms,--one Masc. in
-us, and one Neuter in -um; as, clipeus, clipeum, _shield_; carrus, carrum,
_cart_.

2. Other nouns have one gender in the Singular, another in the Plural;
as,--

  SINGULAR.                  PLURAL.
  balneum, n., _bath_;       balneae, f., _bath-house_.
  epulum, n., _feast_;       epulae, f., _feast_.
  frēnum, n., _bridle_;      frēnī, m.(rarely frēna, n.), _bridle_.
  jocus, m., _jest_;         joca, n. (also jocī, m.), _jests_.
  locus, m., _place_;        loca, n., _places_; locī, m., _passages
                             or topics in an author_.
  rāstrum, n., _rake_;       rāstrī, m.; rāstra, n., _rakes_.

  a. Heterogeneous nouns may at the same time be heteroclites, as in case
  of the first two examples above.

Plurals with Change of Meaning.

61. The following nouns have one meaning in the Singular, and another in
the Plural:--

  SINGULAR.                  PLURAL.
  aedēs, _temple_;           aedēs, _house_.
  auxilium, _help_;          auxilia, _auxiliary troops_.
  carcer, _prison_;          carcerēs, _stalls for racing-chariot_.
  castrum, _fort_;           castra, _camp_.
  cōpia, _abundance_;        cōpiae, _troops_, _resources_.
  fīnis, _end_;              fīnēs, _borders_, _territory_.
  fortūna, _fortune_;        fortūnae, _possessions_, _wealth_.
  grātia, _favor_,           grātiae, _thanks_.
  _gratitude_;
  impedīmentum,              impedīmenta, _baggage_.
  _hindrance_;
  littera, _letter_ (of the  litterae, _epistle; literature_.
  alphabet);
  mōs, _habit_, _custom_;    mōrēs, _character_.
  opera, _help_, _service_;  operae, _laborers_.
  (ops) opis, _help_;        opēs, _resources_.
  pars, _part_;              partēs, _party_; _rôle_.
  sāl, _salt_;               sălēs, _wit_.

       *       *       *       *       *

B. ADJECTIVES.

62. Adjectives denote _quality_. They are declined like nouns, and fall
into two classes,--

1. Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions.

2. Adjectives of the Third Declension.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADJECTIVES OF THE FIRST AND SECOND DECLENSIONS.

63. In these the Masculine is declined like hortus, puer, or ager, the
Feminine like porta, and the Neuter like bellum. Thus, Masculine like
hortus:--

                      Bonus, _good_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  bonus           bona            bonum
  _Gen._  bonī            bonae           bonī
  _Dat._  bonō            bonae           bonō
  _Acc._  bonum           bonam           bonum
  _Voc._  bone            bona            bonum
  _Abl._  bonō            bonā            bonō

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  bonī            bonae           bona
  _Gen._  bonōrum         bonārum         bonōrum
  _Dat._  bonīs           bonīs           bonīs
  _Acc._  bonōs           bonās           bona
  _Voc._  bonī            bonae           bona
  _Abl._  bonīs           bonīs           bonīs

1. The Gen. Sing. Masc. and Neut. of Adjectives in -ius ends in -iī (not in
-ī as in case of Nouns; see § 25, 1; 2). So also the Voc. Sing. of such
Adjectives ends in -ie, not in ī. Thus eximius forms Gen. eximiī; Voc.
eximie.

2. Distributives (see § 78, 1, c) regularly form the Gen. Plu. Masc. and
Neut. in -um instead of -ōrum (compare § 25, 6); as, dēnum centēnum; but
always singulōrum.

64. Masculine like puer:--

                     Tener, _tender_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE        NEUTER.
  _Nom._  tener           tenera          tenerum
  _Gen._  tenerī          tenerae         tenerī
  _Dat._  tenerō          tenerae         tenerō
  _Acc._  tenerum         teneram         tenerum
  _Voc._  tener           tenera          tenerum
  _Abl._  tenerō          tenerā          tenerō

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  tenerī          tenerae         tenera
  _Gen._  tenerōrum       tenerārum       tenerōrum
  _Dat._  tenerīs         tenerīs         tenerīs
  _Acc._  tenerōs         tenerās         tenera
  _Voc._  tenerī          tenerae         tenera
  _Abl._  tenerīs         tenerīs         tenerīs

65. Masculine like ager:--

                     Sacer, _sacred_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  sacer           sacra           sacrum
  _Gen._  sacrī           sacrae          sacrī
  _Dat._  sacrō           sacrae          sacrō
  _Acc._  sacrum          sacram          sacrum
  _Voc._  sacer           sacra           sacrum
  _Abl._  sacrō           sacrā           sacrō

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  sacrī           sacrae          sacra
  _Gen._  sacrōrum        sacrārum        sacrōrum
  _Dat._  sacrīs          sacrīs          sacrīs
  _Acc._  sacrōs          sacrās          sacra
  _Voc._  sacrī           sacrae          sacra
  _Abl._  sacrīs          sacrīs          sacrīs

1. Most adjectives in -er are declined like sacer. The following however,
are declined like tener: asper, _rough_; lacer, _torn_; līber, _free_;
miser, _wretched_; prōsper, _prosperous_; compounds in -fer and -ger;
sometimes dexter, _right_.

2. Satur, _full_, is declined: satur, satura, saturum.

Nine Irregular Adjectives.

66. Here belong--

  alius, _another_;           alter, _the other_;
  ūllus, _any_;               nūllus, _none_;
  uter, _which?_ (of two);    neuter, _neither_;
  sōlus, _alone_;             tōtus, _whole_;
                ūnus, _one_, _alone_.

They are declined as follows:--

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  alius           alia            aliud
  _Gen._  alterĭus        alterĭus        alterĭus[15]
  _Dat._  aliī            aliī            aliī
  _Acc._  alium           aliam           aliud
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  aliō            aliā            aliō

  _Nom._  alter           altera          alterum
  _Gen._  alterĭus        alterĭus        alterĭus
  _Dat._  alterī          alterī[16]      alterī
  _Acc._  alterum         alteram         alterum
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  alterō          alterā          alterō

  _Nom._  uter            utra            utrum
  _Gen._  utrīus          utrīus          utrīus
  _Dat._  utrī            utrī            utrī
  _Acc._  utrum           utram           utrum
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  utrō            utrā            utrō

  _Nom._  tōtus           tōta            tōtum
  _Gen._  tōtīus          tōtīus          tōtīus
  _Dat._  tōtī            tōtī            tōtī
  _Acc._  tōtum           tōtam           tōtum
  _Voc._  ----            ----            ----
  _Abl._  tōtō            tōtā            tōtō

1. All these words lack the Vocative. The Plural is regular.

2. Neuter is declined like uter.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADJECTIVES OF THE THIRD DECLENSION.

67. These fall into three classes,--

1. Adjectives of three terminations in the Nominative Singular,--one for
each gender.

2. Adjectives of two terminations.

3. Adjectives of one termination.

  a. With the exception of Comparatives, and a few other words mentioned
  below in § 70, 1, all Adjectives of the Third Declension follow the
  inflection of ĭ-stems; i.e. they have the Ablative Singular in -ī, the
  Genitive Plural in -ium, the Accusative Plural in -īs (as well as -ēs) in
  the Masculine and Feminine, and the Nominative and Accusative Plural in
  -ia in Neuters.

Adjectives of Three Terminations.

68. These are declined as follows:--

                      Ācer, _sharp_.

                        SINGULAR.
          MASCULINE.      FEMININE.       NEUTER.
  _Nom._  ācer            ācris           ācre
  _Gen._  ācris           ācris           ācris
  _Dat._  ācrī            ācrī            ācrī
  _Acc._  ācrem           ācrem           ācre
  _Voc._  ācer            ācris           ācre
  _Abl._  ācrī            ācrī            ācrī

                         PLURAL.
  _Nom._  ācrēs           ācrēs           ācria
  _Gen._  ācrium          ācrium          ācrium
  _Dat_,  ācribus         ācribus         ācribus
  _Acc._  ācrēs, -īs      ācrēs, -īs      ācria
  _Voc._  ācrēs           ācrēs           ācria
  _Abl._  ācribus         ācribus         ācribus

1. Like ācer are declined alacer, _lively_; campester, _level_; celeber,
_famous_; equester, _equestrian_; palūster, _marshy_; pedester,
_pedestrian_; puter, _rotten_; salūber, _wholesome_; silvester, _woody_;
terrester, _terrestrial_; volucer, _winged_; also names of months in -ber,
as September.

2. Celer, celeris, celere, _swift_, retains the e before r, but lacks the
Genitive Plural.

3. In the Nominative Singular of Adjectives of this class the Feminine form
is sometimes used for the Masculine. This is regularly true of salūbris,
silvestris, and terrestris. In case of the other words in the list, the use
of the Feminine for the Masculine is confined chiefly to early and late
Latin, and to poetry.

Adjectives of Two Terminations.

69. These are declined as follows:--

               Fortis, _strong._              Fortior, _stronger._
                                SINGULAR.
          M. AND F.       NEUT.           M. AND F.       NEUT.
  _Nom._  fortis          forte           fortior         fortius
  _Gen._  fortis          fortis          fortiōris       fortiōris
  _Dat._  fortī           fortī           fortiōrī        fortiōrī
  _Acc._  fortem          forte           fortiōrem       fortius
  _Voc._  fortis          forte           fortior         fortius
  _Abl._  fortī           fortī           fortiōre        fortiōre

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  fortēs          fortia          fortiōrēs       fortiōra
  _Gen._  fortium         fortium         fortiōrum       fortiōrum
  _Dat._  fortibus        fortibus        fortiōribus     fortiōribus
  _Acc._  fortēs, -īs     fortia          fortiōrēs, -īs  fortiōra
  _Voc._  fortēs          fortia          fortiōrēs       fortiōra
  _Abl._  fortibus        fortibus        fortiōribus     fortiōribus

1. Fortior is the Comparative of fortis. All Comparatives are regularly
declined in the same way. The Acc. Plu. in -īs is rare.

Adjectives of One Termination.


70.             Fēlīx, _happy._.              Prūdēns, _prudent._

                                SINGULAR.
          M. AND F.       NEUT.           M. AND F.       NEUT.
  _Nom._  fēlīx           fēlīx           prūdēns         prūdēns
  _Gen._  fēlīcīs         fēlīcis         prūdentis       prūdentis
  _Dat._  fēlīcī          fēlīcī          prūdentī        prūdentī
  _Acc._  fēlīcem         fēlīx           prūdentem       prūdēns
  _Voc._  fēlīx           fēlīx           prūdēns         prūdēns
  _Abl._  fēlīcī          fēlīcī          prūdentī        prūdentī

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  fēlīcēs         fēlīcia         prūdentēs       prūdentia
  _Gen._  fēlīcium        fēlīcium        prūdentium      prūdentium
  _Dat._  fēlīcibus       fēlīcibus       prūdentibus     prūdentibus
  _Acc._  fēlīcēs, -īs    fēlīcia         prūdentēs, -īs  prūdentia
  _Voc._  fēlīcēs         fēlīcia         prūdentēs       prūdentia
  _Abl._  fēlīcibus       fēlīcibus       prūdentibus     prūdentibus

                 Vetus, _old_.                   Plūs, _more_.

                                SINGULAR.
          M. AND F.       NEUT.           M. AND F.       NEUT.
  _Nom._  vetus           vetus           ----            plūs
  _Gen._  veteris         veteris         ----            plūris
  _Dat._  veterī          veterī          ----            ----
  _Acc._  veterem         vetus           ----            plūs
  _Voc._  vetus           vetus           ----            ----
  _Abl._  vetere          vetere          ----            plūre

                                 PLURAL.
  _Nom._  veterēs         vetera          plūrēs          plūra
  _Gen._  veterum         veterum         plūrium         plūrium
  _Dat._  veteribus       veteribus       plūribus        plūribus
  _Acc._  veterēs         vetera          plūrēs, -īs     plūra
  _Voc._  veterēs         vetera          ----            ----
  _Abl._  veteribus       veteribus       plūribus        plūribus

1. It will be observed that vetus is declined as a pure Consonant-Stem;
i.e. Ablative Singular in -e, Genitive Plural in -um, Nominative Plural
Neuter in -a, and Accusative Plural Masculine and Feminine in -ēs only. In
the same way are declined compos, _controlling_; dīves, _rich_; particeps,
_sharing_; pauper, _poor_; prīnceps, _chief_; sōspes, _safe_; superstes,
_surviving_. Yet dīves always has Neut. Plu. dītia.

2. Inops, _needy_, and memor, _mindful_, have Ablative Singular inopī,
memorī, but Genitive Plural inopum, memorum.

3. Participles in -āns and -ēns follow the declension of ī-stems. But they
do not have -ī the Ablative, except when employed as adjectives; when used
as participles or as substantives, they have -e; as,--

  ā sapientī virō, _by a wise man_; but
  ā sapiente, _by a philosopher._
  Tarquiniō rēgnante, _under the reign of Tarquin._

4. Plūs, in the Singular, is always a noun.

5. In the Ablative Singular, adjectives, when used as substantives,--

  a) usually retain the adjective declension; as,--

    aequālis, _contemporary_, Abl. aequālī.
    cōnsulāris, _ex-consul_, Abl. cōnsulārī

  So names of Months; as, Aprīlī, _April_; Decembrī, _December_.

  b) But adjectives used as proper names have -e in the Ablative Singular;
  as, Celere, Celer; Juvenāle, _Juvenal_.

  c) Patrials in -ās, -ātis and -īs, -ītis, when designating places
  regularly have -ī; as, in Arpīnātī, _on the estate at Arpinum_, yet -e,
  when used of persons; as, ab Arpīnāte, _by an Arpinatian_.

6. A very few indeclinable adjectives occur, the chief of which are frūgī,
_frugal_; nēquam, _worthless_.

7. In poetry, adjectives and participles in -ns sometimes form the Gen.
Plu. in -um instead of -ium; as, venientum, _of those coming_.

       *       *       *       *       *

COMPARISON OF ADJECTIVES.

71. 1. There are three degrees of Comparison,--the Positive, the
Comparative, and the Superlative.

2. The Comparative is regularly formed by adding -ior (Neut. -ius), and the
Superlative by adding -issimus (-a, -um), to the Stem of the Positive
deprived of its final vowel; as,--

  altus, _high_,              altior, _higher_,   altissimus, _highest_,
                                                  _very high_.
  fortis, _brave_,            fortior,            fortissimus.
  fēlīx, _fortunate_,         fēlīcior,           fēlīcissimus.

So also Participles, when used as Adjectives; as,--

  doctus, _learned_,          doctior,            doctissimus.
  egēns, _needy_,             egentior,           egentissimus.

3. Adjectives in -er form the Superlative by appending -rimus to the
Nominative of the Positive. The Comparative is regular. Thus:--

  asper, _rough_,             asperior,           asperrimus.
  pulcher, _beautiful_,       pulchrior,          pulcherrimus.
  ācer, _sharp_,              ācrior,             ācerrimus.
  celer, _swift_,             celerior,           celerrimus.

  a. Notice mātūrus, mātūrior, mātūrissimus or mātūrrimus.

4. Five Adjectives in -ilis form the Superlative by adding -limus to the
Stem of the Positive deprived of its final vowel. The Comparative is
regular. Thus:--

  facilis, _easy_,            facilior,           facillimus.
  difficilis, _diffcult_,     difficilior,        difficillimus.
  similis, _like_,            similior,           simillimus.
  dissimilis, _unlike_,       dissimilior,        dissimillimus.
  humilis, _low_,             humilior,           humillimus.

5. Adjectives in -dicus, -ficus, and -volus form the Comparative and
Superlative as though from forms in -dīcēns, -ficēns, -volēns. Thus:--

  maledicus, _slanderous_,    maledīcentior,      maledīcentissimus.
  magnificus, _magnificent_,  magnificentior,     magnificentissimus.
  benevolus, _kindly_,        benevolentior,      benevolentissimus.

  a. Positives in -dīcēns and -volēns occur in early Latin; as maledīcēns,
  benevolēns.

6. Dīves has the Comparative dīvitior or dītior; Superlative dīvitissimus
or dītissimus.

Irregular Comparison.

72. Several Adjectives vary the Stem in Comparison; _viz_.--

  bonus, _good_,              melior,             optimus.
  malus, _bad_,               pejor,              pessimus.
  parvus, _small_,            minor,              minimus.
  magnus, _large_,            major,              maximus.
  multus, _much_,             plūs,               plūrimus,
  frūgī, _thrifty_,           frūgālior,          frūgālissimus,
  nēquam, _worthless_,        nēquior,            nēquissimus.

Defective Comparison.

73. 1. Positive lacking entirely,--

  (Cf. prae, _in front    prior, _former_,        prīmus, _first_
  of_.)
  (Cf. citrā, _this side  citerior, _on this      citimus, _near_.
  of_.)                   side_,
  (Cf. ultrā, _beyond_.)  ulterior, _farther_,    ultimus, _farthest_.
  (Cf. intrā, _within_.)  interior, _inner_,      intimus, _inmost_
  (Cf. prope, _near_.)    propior, _nearer_,      proximus, _nearest_.
  (Cf. dē, _down_.)       dēterior, _inferior_,   dēterrimus, _worst_.
  (Cf. archaic potis,     potior, _preferable_,   potissimus, _chiefest_
  _possible_.)

2. Positive occurring only in special cases,--

  posterō diē, annō,      posterior, _later_,     postrēmus, _latest_,
  etc. _the following                             _last_.
  day_, etc.,                                     postumus, _late-born_,
  posterī,                                        _posthumous_.
  _descendants_,
  exteri,                 exterior, _outer_       extrēmus, extimus,
  _foreigners_,                                   _outermost_.
  nātiōnēs exterae,
  _foreign nations_,
  inferī, _gods of the    īnferior, _lower_,      īnfimus, īmus,
  lower world_,                                   _lowest_.
  Mare Inferum,
  _Mediterranean Sea_,
  superī, _gods           superior, _higher_,     suprēmus, _last_.
  above_,                                         summus, _highest_.
  Mare Superum,
  _Adriatic Sea_,

3. Comparative lacking.

  vetus, _old_,            ----[17]              veterrimus.
  fīdus, _faithful_,       ----                  fīdissimus.
  novus, _new_,            ----[18]              novissimus,[19] _last_.
  sacer, _sacred_,         ----                  sacerrimus.
  falsus, _false_,         ----                  falsissimus.

Also in some other words less frequently used.

4. Superlative lacking.

  alacer, _lively_,        alacrior,             ----
  ingēns, _great_,         ingentior,            ----
  salūtāris, _wholesome_,  salūtārior,           ----
  juvenis, _young_,        jūnior,               ----[20]
  senex, _old_,            senior.               ----[21]

  a. The Superlative is lacking also in many adjectives in -ālis, -īlis,
  -ĭlis, -bilis, and in a few others.

Comparison by _Magis_ and _Maximē_.

74. Many adjectives do not admit terminational comparison, but form the
Comparative and Superlative degrees by prefixing magis (_more_) and maximē
(_most_). Here belong--

1. Many adjectives ending in -ālis, -āris, -idus, -īlis, -icus, imus, īnus,
-ōrus.

2. Adjectives in -us, preceded by a vowel; as, idōneus, _adapted_; arduus,
_steep_; necessārius, _necessary_.

  a. Adjectives in -quus, of course, do not come under this rule. The first
  u in such cases is not a vowel, but a consonant.

Adjectives not admitting Comparison.

75. Here belong--

1. Many adjectives, which, from the nature of their signification, do not
admit of comparison; as, hodiernus, _of to-day_; annuus, _annual_;
mortālis, _mortal_.

2. Some special words; as, mīrus, gnārus, merus; and a few others.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORMATION AND COMPARISON OF ADVERBS.

76. Adverbs are for the most part derived from adjectives, and depend upon
them for their comparison.

1. Adverbs derived from adjectives of the First and Second Declensions form
the Positive by changing -ī of the Genitive Singular to -ē; those derived
from adjectives of the Third Declension, by changing -is of the Genitive
Singular to -iter; as,--

  cārus,      cārē, _dearly_;
  pulcher,    pulchrē, _beautifully_;
  ācer,       ācriter, _fiercely_;
  levis,      leviter, _lightly_.

  a. But Adjectives in -ns, and a few others, add -er (instead of -iter),
  to form the Adverb; as,--

  sapiēns,    sapienter, _wisely_;
  sollers,    sollerter, _skillfully_.

Note audāx, audācter, _boldly_.

2. The Comparative of all Adverbs regularly consists of the Accusative
Singular Neuter of the Comparative of the Adjective; while the Superlative
of the Adverb is formed by changing the -ī of the Genitive Singular of the
Superlative of the Adjective to -ē. Thus--

  (cārus)    cārē, _dearly_,          cārius,      cārissimē.
  (pulcher)  pulchrē, _beautifully_,  pulchrius,   pulcherrimē.
  (ācer)     ācriter, _fiercely_,     ācrius,      ācerrimē.
  (levis)    leviter, _lightly_,      levius,      levissimē.
  (sapiēns)  sapienter, _wisely_,     sapientius,  sapientissimē.
  (audāx)    audācter, _boldly_,      audācius,    audācissimē.

Adverbs Peculiar in Comparison and Formation.


77. 1., _well_,             melius,               optimē.
  malĕ, _ill_,              pejus,                pessimē.
  magnopere, _greatly_,     magis,                maximē.
  multum, _much_,           plūs,                 plūrimum.
  nōn multum, _little_,     minus,                minimē.
  parum,
  diū, _long_,              diūtius,              diūtissimē.
  nēquiter, _worthlessly_,  nēquius,              nēquissimē.
  saepe, _often_,           saepius,              saepissimē.
  mātūrē, _betimes_,        mātūrius,             mātūrrimē.
                                                  mātūrissimē.
  prope, _near_,            propius,              proximē.
  nūper, _recently_,        ----                  nūperrimē.
  ----                      potius, _rather_,     potissimum,
                                                  _especially_.
  ----                      prius, _previously_,  prīmum, _first_.
                            _before_,
  secus, _otherwise_,       sētius, _less_.

2. A number of adjectives of the First and Second Declensions form an
Adverb in -ō, instead of -ē; as,--

  crēbrō, _frequently_;   falsō, _falsely_;
  continuō,               subitō, _suddenly_;
  _immediately_;
              rārō, _rarely_, and a few
              others.

  a. cito, quickly, has -ŏ.

3. A few adjectives employ the Accusative Singular Neuter as the Positive
of the Adverb; as,--

  multum, _much_;   paulum,           facile,
                    _little_;         _easily_.

4. A few adjectives of the First and Second Declensions form the Positive
in -iter; as,--

  fīrmus, fīrmiter, _firmly_;     hūmānus, hūmāniter, _humanly_;
  largus, largiter, _copiously_;  alius, aliter, _otherwise_.

  a. violentus has violenter.

5. Various other adverbial suffixes occur, the most important of which are
-tus and -tim; as, antīquitus, _anciently_; paulātim, _gradually_.

       *       *       *       *       *

NUMERALS.

78. Numerals may be divided into--

I. Numeral Adjectives, comprising--

  a. _Cardinals_; as, ūnus, _one_; duo, _two_; etc.

  b. _Ordinals_; as, prīmus, _first_; secundus, _second_; etc.

  c. _Distributives_; as, singulī, _one by one_; bīnī, _two by two_; etc.

II. Numeral Adverbs; as, semel, _once_; bis, _twice_; etc.

79. TABLE OF NUMERAL ADJECTIVES AND ADVERBS.

              CARDINALS.                 ORDINALS.
          1.  ūnus, ūna, ūnum            prīmus, _first_
          2.  duo, duae, duo             secundus, _second_
          3.  trēs, tria                 tertius, _third_
          4.  quattuor                   quārtus, _fourth_
          5.  quīnque                    quīntus, _fifth_
          6.  sex                        sextus
          7.  septem                     septimus
          8.  octo                       octāvus
          9.  novem                      nōnus
         10.  decem                      decimus
         11.  ūndecim                    ūndecimus
         12.  duodecim                   duodecimus
         13.  tredecim                   tertius decimus
         14.  quattuordecim              quārtus decimus
         15.  quīndecim                  quīntus decimus
         16.  sēdecim,                   sextus decimus
              sexdecim
         17.  septendecim                septimus decimus
         18.  duodēvīgintī               duodēvīcēsimus
         19.  ūndēvīgintī                ūndēvīcēsimus
         20.  vīgintī                    vīcēsimus
         21.  vīgintī ūnus,              vīcēsimus prīmus,
              ūnus et vīgintī            ūnus et vīcēsimus
         22.  vīgintī duo,               vīcēsimus secundus,
              duo et vīgintī             alter et vīcēsimus
         30.  trīgintā                   trīcēsimus
         40.  quadrāgintā                quadrāgēsimus
         50.  quīnquāgintā               quīnquāgēsimus
         60.  sexāgintā                  sexāgēsimus
         70.  septuāgintā                septuāgēsimus
         80.  octōgintā                  octōgēsimus
         90.  nōnāgintā                  nōnāgēsimus
        100.  centum                     centēsimus
        101.  centum ūnus,               centēsimus prīmus,
              centum et ūnus             centēsimus et prīmus
        200.  ducentī, -ae, -a           ducentēsimus
        300.  trecentī                   trecentēsimus
        400.  quadringentī               quadringentēsimus
        500.  quīngentī                  quīngentēsimus
        600.  sescentī                   sescentēsimus
        700.  septingentī                septingentēsimus
        800.  octingentī                 octingentēsimus
        900.  nōngentī                   nōngentēsimus
      1,000.  mīlle                      mīllēsimus
      2,000.  duo mīlia                  bis mīllēsimus
    100,000.  centum mīlia               centiēs mīllēsimus
  1,000,000.  deciēs centēna mīlia       deciēs centiēs mīllēsimus

              DISTRIBUTIVES.             ADVERBS.
          1.  singuli, _one by one_      semel, _once_
          2.  bīnī, _two by two_         bis
          3.  ternī (trīnī)              ter
          4.  quaternī                   quater
          5.  quīnī                      quīnquiēs
          6.  sēnī                       sexiēs
          7.  septēnī                    septiēs
          8.  octōnī                     octiēs
          9.  novēnī                     noviēs
         10.  dēnī                       deciēs
         11.  ūndēnī                     ūndeciēs
         12.  duodēnī                    duodeciēs
         13.  ternī denī                 terdeciēs
         14.  quaternī denī              quaterdeciēs
         15.  quīnī dēnī                 quīnquiēs deciēs
         16.  sēnī dēnī                  sexiēs deciēs
         17.  septēnī dēnī               septiēs deciēs
         18.  duodēvicēnī                octiēs deciēs
         19.  ūndēvīcēnī                 noviēs deciēs
         20.  vīcēnī                     vīciēs
         21.  vīcēnī singulī,            vīciēs semel
              singulī et vīcēnī
         22.  vīcēni bīnī,               vīciēs bis
              bīnī et vīcēnī
         30.  trīcēnī                    trīciēs
         40.  quadrāgēnī                 quadrāgiēs
         50.  quīnquāgēnī                quīnquāgiēs
         60.  sexāgēnī                   sexāgiēs
         70.  septuāgēnī                 septuāgiēs
         80.  octōgēnī                   octōgiēs
         90.  nōnāgēnī                   nōnāgiēs
        100.  centēnī                    centiēs
        101.  centēnī singulī,           centiēs semel
              centēnī et singulī
        200.  ducēnī                     ducentiēs
        300.  trecēnī                    trecentiēs
        400.  quadringēnī                quadringentiēs
        500.  quīngēnī                   quīngentiēs
        600.  sescēnī                    sescentiēs
        700.  septingēnī                 septingentiēs
        800.  octingēnī                  octingentiēs
        900.  nōngēnī                    nōngentiēs
      1,000.  singula mīlia              mīliēs
      2,000.  bīna mīlia                 bis mīliēs
    100,000.  centēna mīlia              centiēs mīliēs
  1,000,000.  deciēs centēna mīlia       deciēs centiēs mīliēs

NOTE.-- -ēnsimus and -iēns are often written in the numerals instead of
-ēsimus and -iēs.

Declension of the Cardinals.

80. 1. The declension of ūnus has already been given under § 66.

2. Duo is declined as follows:--

  _Nom._  duo             duae            duo
  _Gen._  duōrum          duārum          duōrum
  _Dat._  duōbus          duābus          duōbus
  _Acc._  duōs, duo       duās            duo
  _Abl._  duōbus          duābus          duōbus

  a. So ambō, _both_, except that its final o is long.

3. Trēs is declined,--

  _Nom._  trēs            tria
  _Gen._  trium           trium
  _Dat._  tribus          tribus
  _Acc._  trēs (trīs)     tria
  _Abl._  tribus          tribus

4. The hundreds (except centum) are declined like the Plural of bonus.

5. Mīlle is regularly an adjective in the Singular, and indeclinable. In
the Plural it is a substantive (followed by the Genitive of the objects
enumerated; § 201, 1), and is declined,--

  _Nom._  mīlia       _Acc._  mīlia
  _Gen._  mīlium      _Voc._  mīlia
  _Dat._  mīlibus     _Abl._  mīlibus

Thus mīlle hominēs, _a thousand men_; but duo mīlia hominum, _two thousand
men_, literally _two thousands of men_.

  a. Occasionally the Singular admits the Genitive construction; as, mīlle
  hominum.

6. Other Cardinals are indeclinable. Ordinals and Distributives are
declined like Adjectives of the First and Second Declensions.

Peculiarities in the Use of Numerals.

81. 1. The compounds from 21 to 99 may be expressed either with the larger
or the smaller numeral first. In the latter case, et is used. Thus:--

    trīgintā sex or sex et trīgintā, _thirty-six_.

2. The numerals under 90, ending in 8 and 9, are often expressed by
subtraction; as,--

    duodēvīgintī, _eighteen_ (but also octōdecim);

    ūndēquadrāgintā, _thirty-nine_ (but also trīgintā novem or novem et
    trīgintā).

3. Compounds over 100 regularly have the largest number first; the others
follow without et; as,--

    centum vīgintī septem, _one hundred and twenty-seven_.

    annō octingentēsimō octōgēsimō secundō, _in the year 882_.

Yet et may be inserted where the smaller number is either a digit or one of
the tens; as,--

    centum et septem, _one hundred and seven_;

    centum et quadrāgintā, _one hundred and forty_.

4. The Distributives are used--

  a) To denote _so much each_, _so many apiece_; as,--

    bīna talenta eīs dedit, _he gave them two talents each_.

  b) When those nouns that are ordinarily Plural in form, but Singular in
  meaning, are employed in a Plural sense; as,--

    bīnae litterae, _two epistles_.

  But in such cases, ūnī (not singulī) is regularly employed for _one_, and
  trīnī (not ternī) for three; as,--

    ūnae litterae, _one epistle_; trīnae litterae, _three epistles_.

  c) In multiplication; as,--

    bis bīna sunt quattuor, _twice two are four_.

  d) Often in poetry, instead of the cardinals; as,--

    bīna hastīlia, _two spears_.

       *       *       *       *       *

C. PRONOUNS.

82. A Pronoun is a word that indicates something without naming it.

83. There are the following classes of pronouns:--

     I.  Personal.                V.  Intensive.
    II.  Reflexive.              VI.  Relative.
   III.  Possessive.            VII.  Interrogative.
    IV.  Demonstrative.        VIII.  Indefinite.

I. PERSONAL PRONOUNS.

84. These correspond to the English _I_, _you_, _he_, _she_, _it_, etc.,
and are declined as follows:--

          First Person.     Second Person.    Third Person.

                            SINGULAR.
  _Nom._  ego, _I_          tū, _thou_        is, _he_; ea, _she_; id,
                                              _it_
  _Gen._  meī               tuī               (For declension see § 87.)
  _Dat._  mihi[22]          tibi[22]
  _Acc._  mē                tē
  _Voc._  ----              tū
  _Abl._  mē                tē

                            PLURAL.
  _Nom._  nōs, _we_         vōs, _you_
  _Gen._  nostrum, nostrī   vestrum, vestrī
  _Dat._  nōbīs             vōbīs
  _Acc._  nōs               vōs
  _Voc._  ----              vōs
  _Abl._  nōbīs             vōbīs

1. A Dative Singular mī occurs in poetry.

2. Emphatic forms in -met are occasionally found; as, egomet, _I myself_;
tibimet, _to you yourself_; tū has tūte and tūtemet (written also tūtimet).

3. In early Latin, mēd and tēd occur as Accusative and Ablative forms.

       *       *       *       *       *

II. REFLEXIVE PRONOUNS.

85. These refer to the subject of the sentence or clause in which they
stand; like _myself_, _yourself_, in '_I see myself_,' etc. They are
declined as follows:--

          _First Person._         _Second Person._        _Third Person._
          Supplied by oblique     Supplied by oblique
          cases of ego.           cases of tū.
  _Gen._  meī, _of myself_        tuī, _of thyself_       suī
  _Dat._  mihi, _to myself_       tibi, _to thyself_      sibi[22]
  _Acc._  mē, _myself_            tē, _thyself_           sē or sēsē
  _Voc._  ----                    ----                    ----
  _Abl._  mē, _with myself_,      tē, _with thyself_,     sē or sēsē
          etc.                    etc.

1. The Reflexive of the Third Person serves for _all genders_ and for _both
numbers_. Thus sui may mean, _of himself_, _herself_, _itself_, or _of
themselves_; and so with the other forms.

2. All of the Reflexive Pronouns have at times a _reciprocal_ force; as,--

    inter sē pugnant, _they fight with each other_.

3. In early Latin, sēd occurs as Accusative and Ablative.

       *       *       *       *       *

III. POSSESSIVE PRONOUNS.

86. These are strictly adjectives of the First and Second Declensions, and
are inflected as such. They are--

  _First Person._                 _Second Person._
  meus, -a, -um, _my_;            tuus, -a, -um, _thy_;
  noster, nostra, nostrum,        vester, vestra, vestrum,
  _our_;                          _your_;

                  _Third Person._
                  suus, -a, -um, _his_, _her_, _its_, _their_.

1. Suus is exclusively Reflexive; as,--

    pater līberōs suōs amat, _the father loves his children_.

Otherwise, _his_, _her_, _its_ are regularly expressed by the Genitive
Singular of is, viz. ejus; and _their_ by the Genitive Plural, eōrum,
eārum.

2. The Vocative Singular Masculine of meus is mī.

3. The enclitic -pte may be joined to the Ablative Singular of the
Possessive Pronouns for the purpose of emphasis. This is particularly
common in case of suō, suā; as, suōpte, suāpte.

       *       *       *       *       *

IV. DEMONSTRATIVE PRONOUNS.

87. These point out an object as here or there, or as previously mentioned.
They are--

  hīc, _this_ (where I am);
  iste, _that_ (where you are);
  ille, _that_ (something distinct from the speaker);
  is, _that_ (weaker than ille);
  īdem, _the same_.

Hīc, iste, and ille are accordingly the Demonstratives of the First,
Second, and Third Persons respectively.

                                 Hīc, _this_.
                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  hīc         haec       hōc        hī          hae        haec
  _Gen._  hūjus[23]   hūjus      hūjus      hōrum       hārum      hōrum
  _Dat._  huic        huic       huic       hīs         hīs        hīs
  _Acc._  hunc        hanc       hōc        hōs         hās        haec
  _Abl._  hōc         hāc        hōc        hīs         hīs        hīs

                        Iste, _that_, _that of yours._
                   SINGULAR.                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  iste        ista       istud[24]  istī        istae      ista[24]
  _Gen._  istīus      istīus     istīus     istōrum     istārum    istōrum
  _Dat._  istī        istī       istī       istīs       istīs      istīs
  _Acc._  istum       istam      istud      istōs       istās      ista[24]
  _Abl._  istō        istā       istō       istīs       istīs      istīs

Ille (archaic olle), _that_, _that one_, _he_, is declined like iste.[25]

                          Is, _he_, _this_, _that_.
                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom_.  is          ea         id         eī, iī,     eae        ea
                                            (ī)
  _Gen._  ejus        ejus       ejus       eōrum       eārum      eōrum
  _Dat._  eī          eī         eī         eīs, iīs    eīs, iīs   eīs, iīs
  _Acc._  eum         eam        id         eōs         eās        ea
  _Abl._  eō          eā         eō         eīs, iīs    eīs, iīs   eīs, iīs

                              Īdem, _the same_.
                   SINGULAR.                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom_.  īdem        eadem      idem       eīdem,      eaedem     eadem
                                            iīdem
  _Gen._  ejusdem     ejusdem    ejusdem    eōrundem    eārundem   eōrundem
  _Dat._  eīdem       eīdem      eīdem      eīsdem      eīsdem     eīsdem
  _Acc._  eundem      eandem     idem       eōsdem      eāsdem     eadem
  _Abl._  eōdem       eādem      eōdem      eīsdem      eīsdem     eīsdem

  The Nom. Plu. Masc. also has īdem, and the Dat. Abl. Plu. īsdem or iīsdem

       *       *       *       *       *

V. THE INTENSIVE PRONOUN.

88. The Intensive Pronoun in Latin is ipse. It corresponds to the English
_myself_, etc., in '_I myself_, _he himself._'

                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  ipse        ipsa       ipsum      ipsī        ipsae      ipsa
  _Gen._  ipsīus      ipsīus     ipsīus     ipsōrum     ipsārum    ipsōrum
  _Dat._  ipsī        ipsī       ipsī       ipsīs       ipsīs      ipsīs
  _Acc._  ipsum       ipsam      ipsum      ipsōs       ipsās      ipsa
  _Abl._  ipsō        ipsā       ipsō       ipsīs       ipsīs      ipsīs

       *       *       *       *       *

VI. THE RELATIVE PRONOUN.

89. The Relative Pronoun is quī, who. It is declined:--

                    SINGULAR                          PLURAL.
          MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.    MASCULINE.  FEMININE.  NEUTER.
  _Nom._  quī         quae       quod       quī         quae       quae
  _Gen._  cūjus       cūjus      cūjus      quōrum      quārum     quōrum
  _Dat._  cui         cui        cui        quibus[26]  quibus     quibus
  _Acc._  quem        quam       quod       quōs        quās       quae
  _Abl._  quō[27]     quā[27]    quō        quibus[26]  quibus     quibus

       *       *       *       *       *

VII. INTERROGATIVE PRONOUNS.

90. The Interrogative Pronouns are quis, _who?_ (substantive) and quī,
_what? what kind of?_ (adjective).

1. Quis, _who_?

                    SINGULAR.               PLURAL.
          MASC. AND FEM.   NEUTER
  _Nom._  quis             quid             The rare Plural
  _Gen._  cūjus            cūjus            follows the declension
  _Dat._  cui              cui              of the Relative Pronoun.
  _Acc._  quem             quid
  _Abl._  quō              quō

2. Quī, _what? what kind of?_ is declined precisely like the Relative
Pronoun; viz. quī, quae, quod, etc.

  a. An old Ablative quī occurs, in the sense of _how? why?_

  b. Quī is sometimes used for quis in Indirect Questions.

  c. Quis, when limiting words denoting persons, is sometimes an adjective.
  But in such cases quis homō = _what man?_ whereas quī homō = _what sort
  of man?_

  d. Quis and quī may be strengthened by adding -nam. Thus:--

  Substantive:    quisnam, _who, pray?_ quidnam, _what, pray?_
  Adjective:      quīnam, quaenam, quodnam, _of what kind, pray?_

       *       *       *       *       *

VIII. INDEFINITE PRONOUNS.

91. These have the general force of _some one_, _any one_.

      SUBSTANTIVES.                 ADJECTIVES.
  M. AND F.               NEUT.         MASC.       FEM.        NEUT.
  quis,                   quid,         quī,        quae, qua,  quod,
  _any one_, _anything_.               _any_.
  aliquis,                aliquid,      aliquī,     aliqua,     aliquod,
       _some one_,                     _any_.
       _something_.
  quisquam,               quidquam,     quisquam,               quidquam,
  _any one_, _anything_.            _any_ (rare)
  quispiam,               quidpiam,     quispiam,   quaepiam,   quodpiam,
  _any one_, _anything_.               _any_.
  quisque,                quidque,      quisque,    quaeque,    quodque,
         _each_.                      _each_.
  quīvīs,     quaevīs,    quidvīs,      quīvis,     quaevīs,    quodvis,
  quīlibet,   quaelibet,  quidlibet     quilibet,   quaelibet,  quodlibet,
  _any one_ (_anything_)           _any you wish_
        _you wish_
  quīdam,     quaedam,    quiddam,      quīdam,     quaedam,    quoddam,
  _a certain person_, or            _a certain_
         _thing_.

1. In the Indefinite Pronouns, only the pronominal part is declined. Thus:
Genitive Singular alicūjus, cūjuslibet, etc.

2. Note that aliquī has aliqua in the Nominative Singular Feminine, also in
the Nominative and Accusative Plural Neuter. Quī has both qua and quae in
these same cases.

3. Quīdam forms Accusative Singular quendam, quandam; Genitive Plural
quōrundam, quārundam; the m being assimilated to n before d.

4. Aliquis may be used adjectively, and (occasionally) aliquī
substantively.

5. In combination with nē, sī, nisi, num, either quis or quī may stand as a
Substantive. Thus: sī quis or sī quī.

6. Ecquis, _any one_, though strictly an Indefinite, generally has
interrogative force. It has both substantive and adjective
forms,--substantive, ecquis, ecquid; adjective, ecquī, ecquae and ecqua,
ecquod.

7. Quisquam is not used in the Plural.

8. There are two Indefinite Relatives,--quīcumque and quisquis, _whoever_.
Quīcumque declines only the first part; quisquis declines both but has only
quisquis, quidquid, quōquō, in common use.

       *       *       *       *       *

PRONOMINAL ADJECTIVES.

92. The following adjectives, also, frequently have pronominal force:--


1.  alius, _another;_                    alter, _the other;_
    uter, _which of two?_ (interr.);     neuter, _neither;_
    _whichever of two_ (rel.);
    ūnus, _one_;                         nūllus, _no one_ (in oblique
                                         cases)

2. The compounds,--

  uterque, utraque, utrumque, _each of two;_
  utercumque, utracumque, utrumcumque, _whoever of two;_
  uterlibet, utralibet, utrumlibet, _either one you please;_
  utervīs, utravīs, utrumvīs, _either one you please;_
  alteruter, alterutra, alterutrum, _the one or the other_.

In these, uter alone is declined. The rest of the word remains unchanged,
except in case of alteruter, which may decline both parts; as,--

  _Nom._  alteruter       altera utra     alterum utrum
  _Gen._  alterius utrīus, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.--_Conjugation._

93. A Verb is a word which asserts something; as, est, _he is_; amat, _he
loves_. The Inflection of Verbs is called Conjugation.

94. Verbs have Voice, Mood, Tense, Number, and Person:--

  1. Two Voices,--Active and Passive.

  2. Three Moods,--Indicative, Subjunctive, Imperative.

  3. Six Tenses,--

    Present,         Perfect,
    Imperfect,       Pluperfect,
    Future,          Future
                     Perfect.

  But the Subjunctive lacks the Future and Future Perfect; while the
  Imperative employs only the Present and Future.

  4. Two Numbers,--Singular and Plural.

  5. Three Persons,--First, Second, and Third.

95. These make up the so-called _Finite Verb_. Besides this, we have the
following Noun and Adjective Forms:--

  1. Noun Forms,--Infinitive, Gerund, and Supine.

  2. Adjective Forms,--Participles (including the Gerundive).

96. The Personal Endings of the Verb are,--

              Active.                       Passive.
  _Sing_. 1.  -ō; -m; -ī (Perf. Ind.);      -r.
          2.  -s; -stī (Perf Ind.);         -rīs, -re;
              -tō or wanting (Impv.);       -re, -tor (Impv.).
          3.  -t; -tō (Impv.);              -tur; -tor (Impv.).
   _Plu_. 1.  -mus;                         -mur.
          2.  -tis; -stis (Perf. Ind.);     -minī.
              -te, -tōte (Impv.);
          3.  -nt; -ērunt (Perf Ind.);      -ntur; -ntor (Impv.).
              -ntō (Impv.);

VERB STEMS.

97. Conjugation consists in appending certain endings to the Stem. We
distinguish three different stems in a fully inflected verb,--

  I. Present Stem, from which are formed--
      1. Present, Imperfect, and Future Indicative,
      2. Present and Imperfect Subjunctive,
      3. The Imperative,
      4. The Present Infinitive,
      - (Active and Passive.)
      5. The Present Active Participle, the Gerund, and Gerundive.
  II. Perfect Stem, from which are formed--
      1. Perfect, Pluperfect, and Future Perfect Indicative,
      2. Perfect and Pluperfect Subjunctive,
      3. Perfect Infinitive,
      - (Active.)
  III. Participial Stem, from which are formed--
      1. Perfect Participle,
      2. Perfect, Pluperfect, and Future Perfect Indicative,
      3. Perfect and Pluperfect Subjunctive,
      4. Perfect Infinitive,
      - (Passive.)

Apparently from the same stem, though really of different origin, are the
Supine, the Future Active Participle, the Future Infinitive Active and
Passive.

THE FOUR CONJUGATIONS.

98. There are in Latin four regular Conjugations, distinguished from each
other by the vowel of the termination of the Present Infinitive Active, as
follows:--

         INFINITIVE   DISTINGUISHING
  CONJUGATION.  TERMINATION.      VOWEL.
    I.      -āre            ā
   II.      -ēre            ē
  III.      -ĕre            ĕ
   IV.      -īre            ī

99. PRINCIPAL PARTS. The Present Indicative, Present Infinitive, Perfect
Indicative, and the Perfect Participle[28] constitute the Principal Parts
of a Latin verb,--so called because they contain the different stems, from
which the full conjugation of the verb may be derived.

       *       *       *       *       *

CONJUGATION OF SUM.

100. The irregular verb sum is so important for the conjugation of all
other verbs that its inflection is given at the outset.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
     PRES. IND.        PRES. INF.        PERF. IND.     FUT. PARTIC.[29]
        sum               esse              fuī             futūrus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
               SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  sum, _I am_,                         sumus, _we are_,
  es, _thou art_,                      estis, _you are_,
  est, _he is_;                        sunt, _they are_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  eram, _I was_,                       erāmus, _we were_,
  erās, _thou wast_,                   erātis, _you were_,
  erat, _he was_;                      erant, _they were_.

                                  FUTURE.
  erō, _I shall be_,                   erimus, _we shall be_,
  eris, _thou wilt be_,                eritis, _you will be_,
  erit, _he will be_;                  erunt, _they will be_.

                                  PERFECT.
  fuī, _I have been_, _I was_,         fuimus, _we have been_, _we were_,
  fuistī, _thou hast been_, _thou      fuistis, _you have been_, _you
  wast_,                               were_,
  fuit, _he has been_, _he was_;       fuērunt, fuēre,
                                       _they have been_, _they were_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  fueram, _I had been_,                fuerāmus, _we had been_,
  fuerās, _thou hadst been_,           fuerātis, _you had been_,
  fuerat, _he had been_;               fuerant, _they had been_.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  fuerō, _I shall have been_,          fuerimus, _we shall have been_,
  fueris, _thou wilt have been_,       fueritis, _you will have been_,
  fuerit, _he will have been_;         fuerint, _they will have been_.

                              SUBJUNCTIVE.[30]

                                  PRESENT.
               SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  sim, _may I be_,                     sīmus, _let us be_,
  sīs, _mayst thou be_,                sītis, _be ye_, _may you be_,
  sit, _let him be_, _may he be_;      sint, _let them be_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  essem,[31] _I should be_,            essēmus, _we should be_,
  essēs,[31] _thou wouldst be_,        essētis, _you would be_,
  esset,[31] _he would be_;            essent,[31] _they would be_.

                                  PERFECT.
  fuerim, _I may have been_,           fuerīmus, _we may have been_,
  fuerīs, _thou mayst have been_,      fuerītis, _you may have been_,
  fuerit, _he may have been_;          fuerint, _they may have been_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  fuissem, _I should have been_,       fuissēmus, _we should have been_.
  fuissēs, _thou wouldst have been_,   fuissētis, _you would have been_,
  fuisset, _he would have been_;       fuissent, _they would have been_.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  es, _be thou_;              este, _be ye_,
  _Fut._   estō, _thou shalt be_,      estōte, _ye shall be_,
           estō, _he shall be_;        suntō, _they shall be_.

              INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  esse, _to be_.
  _Perf._  fuisse, _to have been_.
  _Fut._   futūrus esse,[32] _to be    _Fut._ futūrus,[33] _about to be_.
           about to be_.

       *       *       *       *       *

FIRST (OR Ā-) CONJUGATION.

101. Active Voice.--Amō, _I love_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
        amō             amāre            amāvī              amātus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
  amō, _I love_,                       amāmus, _we love_,
  amās, _you love_,                    amātis, _you love_,
  amat, _he loves_;                    amant, _they love_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  amābam, _I was loving_,[34]          amābāmus, _we were loving_,
  amābās, _you were loving_,           amābātis, _you were loving_,
  amābat, _he was loving_;             amābant, _they were loving_

                                  FUTURE.
  amābō, _I shall love_,               amābimus, _we shall love_,
  amābis, _you will love_,             amābitis, _you will love_,
  amābit, _he will love_;              amābunt, _they will love_.

                                  PERFECT.
  amāvī, _I have loved_, _I loved_,    amāvimus, _we have loved_, _we
                                       loved_,
  amāvistī, _you have loved_, _you     amāvistis, _you have loved_, _you
  loved_                               loved_,
  amāvit, _he has loved_, _he loved_;  amāvērunt, -ēre, _they have
                                       loved_, _they loved_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  amāveram, _I had loved_,             amāverāmus, _we had loved_,
  amāverās, _you had loved_,           amāverātis, _you had loved_,
  amāverat, _he had loved_;            amāverant, _they had loved_.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  amāverō, _I shall have loved_,       amāverimus, _we shall have
                                       loved_,
  amāveris, _you will have loved_,     amāveritis, _you will have
                                       loved_,
  amāverit, _he will have loved_;      amāverint, _they will have
                                       loved_.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
  amem, _may I love_,                  amēmus, _let us love_,
  amēs, _may you love_,                amētis, _may you love_,
  amet, _let him love_;                ament, _let them love_.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  amārem, _I should love_,             amārēmus, _we should love_,
  amārēs, _you would love_,            amārētis, _you would love_,
  amāret, _he would love_;             amārent, _they would love_.

                                  PERFECT.
  amāverim, _I may have loved_,        amāverīmus, _we may have loved_,
  amāverīs, _you may have loved_,      amāverītis, _you may have loved_,
  amāverit, _he may have loved_;       amāverint, _they may have loved_.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  amāvissem, _I should have loved_,    amāvīssēmus, _we should have
                                       loved_,
  amāvissēs, _you would have loved_,   amāvissētis, _you would have
                                       loved_,
  amāvisset, _he would have loved_;    amāvissent, _they would have
                                       loved_.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  amā, _love thou_;           amāte, _love ye_.
  _Fut._   amātō, _thou shalt love_,   amātōte, _ye shall love_,
           amātō, _he shall love_;     amantō, _they shall love_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  amāre, _to love_.           _Pres._  amāns,[35] _loving_.
  _Perf._  amāvisse, _to have loved_.           (Gen. amantis.)
  _Fut._   amātūrus esse, _to be       _Fut._   amātūrus, _about to love_.
           about to love_

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  _Gen._   amandī, _of loving_,
  _Dat._   amandō, _for loving_,
  _Acc._   amandum, _loving_,          _Acc._   amātum, _to love_,
  _Abl._   amandō, _by loving_.        _Abl._   amātū, _to love_, _be
                                                loved_.

102. Passive Voice.--Amor, _I am loved_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
           amōr                   amārī                 amātus sum


                             INDICATIVE MOOD.

                              PRESENT TENSE.
                               _I am loved._
               SINGULAR.                           PLURAL.
           amor                                    amāmur
           amāris                                  amāminī
           amātur                                  amantur

                                 IMPERFECT
                              _I was loved._
           amābar                                  amābāmur
           amābāris, _or_ -re                      amābāmini
           amābātur                                amābantur

                                  FUTURE.
                            _I shall be loved._
           amābor                                  amābimur
           amāberis, _or_ -re                      amābiminī
           amābitur                                amābuntur

                                  PERFECT
                  _I have been loved_, or _I was loved._
           amātus (-a, -um) sum[36]                amātī (-ae, -a) sumus
           amātus es                               amātī estis
           amātus est                              amātī sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                            _I had been loved._
           amātus eram[36]                         amātī erāmus
           amātus erās                             amātī erātis
           amātus erat                             amātī erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                        _I shall have been loved._
           amātus erō[36]                          amātī erimus
           amātus eris                             amātī eritis
           amātus erit                             amātī erunt

                               SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                 PRESENT.
                   _May I be loved_, _let him be loved._
           amer                                    amēmur
           amēris, _or_ -re                        amēmini
           amētur                                  amentur

                                IMPERFECT.

                 _I should be loved_, _he would be loved._
           amārer                                  amārēmur
           amārēris, _or_ -re                      amārēminī
           amārētur                                amārentur

                                 PERFECT.

                         _I may have been loved._
           amātus sim[37]                          amātī sīmus
           amātus sīs                              amāti sītis
           amātus sit                              amāti sint

                                PLUPERFECT.

          _I should have been loved_, _he would have been loved._
           amātus essem[37]                        amātī essēmus
           amātus essēs                            amātī essētis
           amātus esset                            amāti essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  amāre,[38] _be thou         amāminī, _be ye loved._
           loved_;
  _Fut._   amātor, _thou shalt be
           loved_,
           amātor, _he shall be        amantor, _they shall be loved_.
           loved_;

              INFINITIVE.                        PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  amārī, _to be loved_.
  _Perf._  amātus esse, _to have been  _Perfect._  amātus, _loved_,
           loved_.                                 _having been loved_.
  _Fut._   amātum īrī, _to be about    _Gerundive._  amandus, _to be
           to be loved_.                           loved_, _deserving to
                                                   be loved._

       *       *       *       *       *

SECOND (OR Ē-) CONJUGATION.

103. Active voice.--Moneō, _I advise._

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
       moneō           monēre            monuī             monitus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                                _I advise._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           moneō                                   monēmus
           monēs                                   monētis
           monet                                   monent

                                 IMPERFECT.
                     _I was advising_, or _I advised._
           monēbam                                 monēbāmus
           monēbās                                 monēbātis
           monēbat                                 monēbant

                                  FUTURE.
                             _I shall advise._
           monēbō                                  monēbimus
           monēbis                                 monēbitis
           monēbit                                 monēbunt

                                  PERFECT.
                     _I have advised_, or _I advised._
           monuī                                   monuimus
           monuistī                                monuistis
           monuit                                  monuērunt, _or_ -ēre

                                PLUPERFECT.
                              _I had advised._
           monueram                                monuerāmus
           monuerās                                monuerātis
           monuerat                                monuerant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                          _I shall have advised._
           monuerō                                 monuerimus
           monueris                                monueritis
           monuerit                                monuerint

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.

                     _May I advise_, _let him advise._
           moneam                                  moneāmus
           moneās                                  moneātis
           moneat                                  moneant

                                 IMPERFECT.
                   _I should advise_, _he would advise._
           monērem                                 monērēmus
           monērēs                                 monērētis
           monēret                                 monērent

                                  PERFECT.
                           _I may have advised._
           monuerim                                monuerīmus
           monuerīs                                monuerītis
           monuerit                                monuerint

                                PLUPERFECT.
             _I should have advised_, _he would have advised._
           monuissem                               monuissēmus
           monuissēs                               monuissētis
           monuisset                               monuissent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  monē, _advise thou_;        monēte, _advise ye_.
  _Fut._   monētō, _thou shall         monētōte, _ye shall advise_,
           advise_,
           monētō, _he shall advise_;  monentō, _they shall advise._

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  monēre, _to advise_.        _Pres._     monēns, _advising_.
  _Perf._  monuisse, _to have                      (Gen. monentis.)
           advised_.
  _Fut._   monitūrus esse, _to be      _Fut._      monitūrus, _about to
           about to advise_.                       advise_.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  _Gen._   monendī, _of advising_,
  _Dat._   monendō, _for advising_,
  _Acc._   monendum, _advising_,       _Acc._      monitum, _to advise_,
  _Abl._   monendō, _by advising_.     _Abl._      monitū, _to advise_,
                                                   _be advised_.

104. Passive voice.--Moneor, _I am advised_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
          moneor                  monērī               monitus sum


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                              _I am advised._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           moneor                                  monēmur
           monēris                                 monēminī
           monētur                                 monentur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                              _I was advised._
           monēbar                                 monēbāmur
           monēbāris, _or_ -re                     monēbāminī
           monēbātur                               monēbantur

                                  FUTURE.
                           _I shall be advised._
           monēbor                                 monēbimur
           monēberis, _or_ -re                     monēbiminī
           monēbitur                               monēbuntur

                                  PERFECT.
                  _I have been advised_, _I was advised._
           monitus sum                             monitī sumus
           monitus es                              monitī estis
           monitus est                             monitī sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                           _I had been advised._
           monitus eram                            monitī erāmus
           monitus erās                            monitī erātis
           monitus erat                            monitī erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                        _I shall have been advised._
           monitus erō                             monitī erimus
           monitus eris                            monitī eritis
           monitus erit                            monitī erunt

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                 _May I be advised_, _let him be advised._
           monear                                  moneāmur
           moneāris, _or_ -re                      moneāminī
           moneātur                                moneantur

                                 IMPERFECT.
               _I should be advised_, _he would be advised._
           monērer                                 monērēmur
           monērēris, _or_ -re                     monērēminī
           monērētur                               monērentur

                                  PERFECT.
                         _I may have been advised._
           monitus sim                             monitī sīmus
           monitus sīs                             monitī sītis
           monitus sit                             monitī sint

                                PLUPERFECT.
        _I should have been advised_, _he would have been advised._
           monitus essem                           monitī essēmus
           monitus essēs                           monitī essētis
           monitus esset                           monitī essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  monēre, _be thou advised_;  monēminī, _be ye advised_.
  _Fut._   monētor, _thou shalt be
           advised_,
           monētor, _he shall be       monentor, _they shall be
           advised_.                   advised_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  monērī, _to be advised_.    _Perfect._  monitus, _advised_,
                                                   _having been advised_.
  _Perf._  monitus esse, _to have
           been advised_
  _Fut._   monitum īrī, _to be about   _Gerundive._  monendus, _to be
           to be advised._                         advised_, _deserving to
                                                   be advised._

       *       *       *       *       *

THIRD (OR CONSONANT-) CONJUGATION.

105. Active Voice.--Regō, _I rule_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
       regō            regere            rēxī               rēctus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                                  _I rule_

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           regō                                    regimus
           regis                                   regitis
           regit                                   regunt

                                 IMPERFECT.
                       _I was ruling_, or _I ruled_.
           regēbam                                 regēbāmus
           regēbās                                 regēbātis
           regēbat                                 regēbant

                                  FUTURE.
                              _I shall rule_.
           regam                                   regēmus
           regēs                                   regētis
           reget                                   regent

                                  PERFECT.
                        _I have ruled_, or _I ruled_
           rēxī                                    rēximus
           rēxistī                                 rēxistis
           rēxit                                   rēxērunt, _or_ -ēre

                                PLUPERFECT.
                               _I had ruled_.
           rēxeram                                 rēxerāmus
           rēxerās                                 rēxerātis
           rēxerat                                 rēxerant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                           _I shall have ruled_.
           rēxerō                                  rēxerimus
           rēxeris                                 rēxeritis
           rēxerit                                 rēxerint

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                       _May I rule_, _let him rule._
           regam                                   regāmus
           regās                                   regātis
           regat                                   regant

                                 IMPERFECT.
                     _I should rule_, _he would rule._
           regerem                                 regerēmus
           regerēs                                 regerētis
           regeret                                 regerent

                                  PERFECT.
                            _I may have ruled._
           rēxerim                                 rēxerīmus
           rēxerīs                                 rēxerītis
           rēxerit                                 rēxerint

                                PLUPERFECT.
               _I should have ruled_, _he would have ruled._
           rēxissem                                rēxissēmus
           rēxissēs                                rēxissētis
           rēxisset                                rēxissent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  rege, _rule thou_;                   regite, _rule ye_.
  regitō, _thou shall rule_,           regitōte, _ye shall rule_,
  regitō, _he shall rule_;             reguntō, _they shall rule_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  regere, _to rule_.                   _Pres._     regēns, _ruling_.
  rēxisse, _to have ruled_.                        (Gen. regentis.)
  rēctūrus esse, _to be about to       _Fut._      rēctūrus, _about to
  rule_                                            rule_.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  regendī, _of ruling_,
  regendō, _for ruling_,
  regendum, _ruling_,                  _Acc._      rēctum, _to rule_,
  regendō, _by ruling_.                _Abl._      rēctū, _to rule_, _be
                                                   ruled_.

106. Passive Voice.--Regor, _I am ruled_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
          regor                    regī                 rēctus sum


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                               _I am ruled._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           regor                                   regimur
           regeris                                 regiminī
           regitur                                 reguntur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                               _I was ruled._
           regēbar                                 regēbāmur
           regēbāris, _or_ -re                     regēbāminī
           regēbātur                               regēbantur

                                  FUTURE.
                            _I shall be ruled._
           regar                                   regēmur
           regēris, _or_ -re                       regēminī
           regētur                                 regentur

                                  PERFECT.
                   _I have been ruled_, or _I was ruled_.
           rēctus sum                              rēctī sumus
           rēctus es                               rēctī estis
           rēctus est                              rēctī sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                            _I had been ruled._
           rēctus eram                             rēctī erāmus
           rēctus erās                             rēctī erātis
           rēctus erat                             rēctī erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                         _I shall have been ruled_
           rēctus erō                              rēctī erimus
           rēctus eris                             rēctī eritis
           rēctus erit                             rēctī erunt

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                   _May I be ruled_, _let him be ruled._
           regar                                   regāmur
           regāris, _or_ -re                       regāminī
           regātur                                 regantur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                 _I should be ruled_, _he would be ruled._
           regerer                                 regerēmur
           regerēris, _or_ -re                     regerēminī
           regerētur                               regerentur

                                  PERFECT.
                          _I may have been ruled._
           rēctus sim                              rēctī sīmus
           rēctus sīs                              rēctī sītis
           rēctus sit                              rēctī sint

                                PLUPERFECT.
          _I should have been ruled_, _he would have been ruled._
           rēctus essem                            rēctī essēmus
           rēctus essēs                            rectī essētis
           rēctus esset                            rectī essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  regere, _be thou ruled_;    regiminī, _be ye ruled_.
  _Fut._   regitor, _thou shalt be
           ruled_,
           regitor, _he shall be       reguntor, _they shall be ruled_.
           ruled_;

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  regī, _to be ruled_.        _Perfect._  rēctus, _ruled_,
                                                   _having been ruled_.
  _Perf._  rēctus esse, _to have been  _Gerundive._  regendus, _to be
           ruled_.                                 ruled_, _deserving to
                                                   be ruled_.
  _Fut._   rēctum īrī, _to be about
           to be ruled_.

       *       *       *       *       *

FOURTH (OR Ī-) CONJUGATION.

107. Active voice.--Audiō, _I hear_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
       audiō           audīre           audīvī             audītus


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                                 _I hear._

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           audiō                       audīmus
           audīs                       audītis
           audit                       audiunt

                                 IMPERFECT.
                       _I was hearing_, or _I heard._
           audiēbam                    audiēbāmus
           audiēbās                    audiēbātis
           audiēbat                    audiēbant

                                  FUTURE.
                              _I shall hear._
           audiam                                  audiēmus
           audiēs                                  audiētis
           audiet                                  audient

                                  PERFECT.
                       _I have heard_, or _I heard._
           audīvī                                  audīvimus
           audīvistī                               audīvistis
           audīvit                                 audīvērunt, _or _-ēre

                                PLUPERFECT.
                               _I had heard._
           audīveram                               audīverāmus
           audīverās                               audīverātis
           audīverat                               audīverant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                           _I shall have heard._
           audīverō                                audīverimus
           audīveris                               audīveritis
           audīverit                               audīverint

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
                       _May I hear_, _let him hear._
           audiam                                  audiāmus
           audiās                                  audiātis
           audiat                                  audiant

                                 IMPERFECT.
                     _I should hear_, _he would hear._
           audīrem                                 audīrēmus
           audīrēs                                 audīrētis
           audīret                                 audīrent

                                  PERFECT.
                            _I may have heard._
           audīverim                               audīverīmus
           audīverīs                               audīverītis
           audīverit                               audīverint

                                PLUPERFECT.
               _I should have heard_, _he would have heard._
           audīvissem                              audīvissēmus
           audīvissēs                              audīvissētis
           audīvisset                              audīvissent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  audī, _hear thou_;          audīte, _hear ye_.
  _Fut._   audītō, _thou shalt hear_,  audītōte, _ye shall hear_,
           audītō, _he shall hear_;    audiuntō, _they shall hear_.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  audīre, _to hear_.          _Pres._     audiēns, _hearing_.
  _Perf._  audīvisse, _to have                     (Gen. audientis.)
           heard_.
  _Fut._   audītūrus esse, _to be      _Fut._      audītūrus, _about to
           about to hear_.                         hear_.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE
  _Gen._   audiendī, _of hearing_,
  _Dat._   audiendō, _for hearing_,
  _Acc._   audiendum, _hearing_,       _Acc._      audītum, _to hear_,
  _Abl._   audiendō, _by hearing_.     _Abl._      audītū, _to hear, be
                                                   heard_.

108. Passive Voice.--Audior, _I am heard_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
          audior                  audīrī               audītus sum


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.
                               _I am heard_.

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
           audior                                  audīmur
           audīris                                 audīminī
           audītur                                 audiuntur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                               _I was heard_.
           audiēbar                                audiēbāmur
           audiēbāris, _or_ -re                    audiēbāminī
           audiēbātur                              audiēbantur

                                  FUTURE.
                            _I shall be heard_.
           audiar                                  audiēmur
           audiēris, _or_ -re                      audiēminī
           audiētur                                audientur

                                  PERFECT.
                   _I have been heard_, or _I was heard_.
           audītus sum                             audītī sumus
           audītus es                              audītī estis
           audītus est                             audītī sunt

                                PLUPERFECT.
                            _I had been heard_.
           audītus eram                            audītī erāmus
           audītus erās                            audītī erātis
           audītus erat                            audītī erant

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
                         _I shall have been heard_.
           audītus erō                             audītī erimus
           audītus eris                            audītī eritis
           audītus erit                            audītī erunt

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.

                   _May I be heard_, _let him be heard_.
           audiar                                  audiāmur
           audiāris, _or_ -re                      audiāminī
           audiātur                                audiantur

                                 IMPERFECT.
                 _I should be heard_, _he would be heard_.
           audīrer                                 audīrēmur
           audīrēris, _or_ -re                     audirēminī
           audīrētur                               audīrentur

                                  PERFECT.
                          _I may have been heard_.
           audītus sim                             audītī sīmus
           audītus sīs                             audītī sītis
           audītus sit                             audītī sint

                                PLUPERFECT.

          _I should have been heard_, _he would have been heard_.
           audītus essem                           audītī essēmus
           audītus essēs                           audītī essētis
           audītus esset                           audītī essent

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  audīre, _be thou heard_;    audīminī, be ye heard.
  _Fut._   audītor, _thou shalt be
           heard_,
           audītor, _he shall be       audiuntor, _they shall be heard_.
           heard_;

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  audīrī, _to be heard_.      _Perfect._  audītus, _heard_,
                                                   _having been heard_
  _Perf._  audītus esse, _to have      _Gerundive._  audiendus, _to be
           been heard_.                            heard_, _deserving to
                                                   be heard_
  _Fut._   audītum īrī, _to be about
           to be heard_.

       *       *       *       *       *

VERBS IN -IŌ OF THE THIRD CONJUGATION.

109. 1. Verbs in -iō of the Third Conjugation take the endings of the
Fourth Conjugation wherever the latter endings have two successive vowels.
This occurs only in the Present System.

2. Here belong--

  a) capiō, _to take_; cupiō, _to desire_; faciō, _to make_; fodiō, _to
  dig_; fugiō, _to flee_; jaciō, _to throw_; pariō, _to bear_; quatiō, _to
  shake_; rapiō, _to seize_; sapiō, _to taste_.

  b) Compounds of laciō and speciō (both ante-classical); as, alliciō,
  _entice_; cōnspiciō, _behold_.

  c) The deponents gradior, _to go_; morior, _to die_, patior, _to suffer_.

110. Active voice.--Capiō, _I take_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
    PRES. IND.       PRES. INF.       PERF. IND.     PERF. PASS. PARTIC.
      capiō,           capere,           cēpī,             captus.


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
  capiō, capis, capit;                 capimus, capitis, capiunt.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  capiēbam, -iēbās, -iēbat;            capiēbāmus, -iēbātis, -iēbant.

                                  FUTURE.
  capiam, -iēs, -iet;                  capiēmus, -iētis, -ient.

                                  PERFECT.
  cēpī, -istī, -it;                    cēpimus, -istis, -ērunt or -ēre.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  cēperam, -erās, -erat;               cēperāmus, -erātis, -erant.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  cēperō, -eris, -erit;                cēperimus, -eritis, -erint.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
  capiam, -iās, -iat;                  capiāmus, -iātis, -iant.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  caperem, -erēs, -eret;               caperēmus, -erētis, -erent.

                                  PERFECT.
  cēperim, -eris, -erit;               cēperīmus, -erītis, -erint.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  cēpissem, -issēs, -isset;            cēpissēmus, -issētis, -issent.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  cape;                                   capite.
  _Fut._   capitō,                                 capitōte,
           capitō;                                 capiuntō.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  capere                      _Pres._     capiēns.
  _Perf._  cēpisse.
  _Fut._   captūrus esse.              _Fut._      captūrus.

                GERUND.                             SUPINE.
  _Gen._   capiendī,
  _Dat._   capiendō,
  _Acc._   capiendum,                  _Acc._      captum,
  _Abl._   capiendō.                   _Abl._      captū.

111. Passive Voice.--Capior, _I am taken_.

                             PRINCIPAL PARTS.
        PRES. IND.              PRES. INF.              PERF. IND.
         capior,                  capī,                captus sum.


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.

                               PRESENT TENSE.

               SINGULAR.                            PLURAL.
  capior, caperis, capitur;            capimur, capiminī, capiuntur.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  capiēbar, -iēbāris, -iēbātur;        capiēbāmur, -iēbāminī, -iēbantur.

                                  FUTURE.
  capiar, -iēris, -iētur;              capiēmur, -iēminī, -ientur.

                                  PERFECT.
  captus sum, es, est;                 captī sumus, estis, sunt.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  captus eram, erās, erat;             captī erāmus, erātis, erant.

                              FUTURE PERFECT.
  captus erō, eris, erit;              captī erimus, eritis, erunt.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.

                                  PRESENT.
  capiar, -iāris, -iātur;              capiāmur, -iāminī, -iantur.

                                 IMPERFECT.
  caperer, -erēris, -erētur;           caperēmur, -erēminī, -erentur.

                                  PERFECT.
  captus sim, sīs, sit;                captī sīmus, sītis, sint.

                                PLUPERFECT.
  captus essem, essēs, esset;          captī essēmus, essētis, essent.

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  capere;                                 capiminī.
  _Fut._   capitor,
           capitor;                                capiuntor.

              INFINITIVE.                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._  capī.
  _Perf._  captus esse.                _Perfect._  captus.
  _Fut._   captum īrī.                 _Gerundive._  capiendus.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEPONENT VERBS.

112. Deponent Verbs have in the main Passive _forms_ with Active or Neuter
_meaning_. But--

  a. They have the following Active forms: Future Infinitive, Present and
  Future Participles, Gerund, and Supine.

  b. They have the following Passive meanings: always in the Gerundive, and
  sometimes in the Perfect Passive Participle; as--

    sequendus, _to be followed_; adeptus, _attained_.

113. Paradigms of Deponent Verbs are--

         I. Conj.  mīror, mīrārī, mīrātus sum, _admire_.
        II. Conj.  vereor, vererī, veritus sum, _fear_.
       III. Conj.  sequor, sequī, secūtus sum, _follow_.
        IV. Conj.  largior, largīrī, largītus sum, _give_.
   III. (in -ior)  patior, patī, passus sum, _suffer_.


                              INDICATIVE MOOD.
           I.           II.          III.         IV.           III (in
                                                                -ior)
  _Pres._  mīror        vereor       sequor       largior       patior
           mīrāris      verēris      sequeris     largiris      pateris
           mīrātur      verētur      sequitur     largītur      patitur
           mīramur      verēmur      sequimur     largīmur      patimur
           mīrāminī     verēminī     sequiminī    largīminī     patiminī
           mīrantur     verentur     sequuntur    largiuntur    patiuntur
  _Impf._  mīrābar      verēbar      sequēbar     largiēbar     patiēbar
  _Fut._   mīrābor      verēbor      sequar       largiar       patiar
  _Perf._  mirātus sum  veritus sum  secūtus sum  largītus sum  passus sum
  _Plup._  mīrātus      veritus      secūtus      largītus      passus
           eram         eram         eram         eram          eram
  _F.P._   mīrātus erō  veritus erō  secūtus erō  largītus erō  passus erō

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._  mīrer        verear       sequar       largiar       patiar
  _Impf._  mīrārer      verērer      sequerer     largīrer      paterer
  _Perf._  mīrātus sim  veritus sim  secūtus sim  largītus sim  passus sim
  _Plup._  mīrātus      veritus      sectūtus     largītus      passus
           essem        essem        essem        essem         essem

                                IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._  mīrāre,      verēre,      sequere,     largīre,      patere,
           etc.         etc.         etc.         etc.          etc.
  _Fut._   mīrātor,     verētor,     sequitor,    largītor,     patitor,
           etc.         etc.         etc.         etc.          etc.

                                INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._  mīrāri       verērī       sequī        largīrī       patī
  _Perf._  mīrātus      veritus      secūtus      largītus      passus
           esse         esse         esse         esse          esse
  _Fut._   mīrātūrus    veritūrus    secūtūrus    largītūrus    passūrus
           esse         esse         esse         esse          esse

                                PARTICIPLES.
  _Pres._  mīrāns       verēns       sequēns      largiēns      patiēns
  _Fut._   mīrātūrus    veritūrus    secūtūrus    largitūrus    passūrus
  _Perf._  mīrātus      veritus      secūtus      largitus      passus
  _Ger._   mīrandus     verendus     sequendus    largiendus    patiendus

                                  GERUND.
           mīrandī      verendī      sequendī     largiendī     patiendī
           mirandō,     verendō,     sequendō,    largiendō,    patiendō,
           etc.         etc.         etc.         etc.          etc.

                                  SUPINE.
           mīrātum,     veritum,     secūtum,     largītum,     passum,
           -tū          -tū          -tū          -tū           -sū

       *       *       *       *       *

SEMI-DEPONENTS.

114. 1. Semi-Deponents are verbs which have the Present System in the
Active Voice, but the Perfect System in the Passive without change of
meaning. Here belong--

  audeō,     audēre,    ausus sum, _to dare_.
  gaudeō,    gaudēre,   gāvīsus sum, _to rejoice_.
  soleō,     solēre,    solitus sum, _to be wont_.
  fīdō,      fīdere,    fīsus sum, _to trust_.

2. The following verbs have a Perfect Passive Participle with Active
meaning:--

  adolēscō, _grow up_;  adultus, _having grown up_,
  cēnāre, _dine_;       cēnātus, _having dined_.
  placēre, _please_;    placitus, _having pleased_, _agreeable_.
  prandēre, _lunch_;    prānsus, _having lunched_.
  pōtāre, _drink_;      pōtus, _having drunk_.
  jūrāre, _swear_;      jūrātus, _having sworn_.

  a. Jūrātus is used in a passive sense also.

3. Revertor and dēvertor both regularly form their Perfect in the Active
Voice; _viz_.--

  revertor,  revertī (Inf.),  revertī (Perf.), _to return_.
  dēvertor,  dēvertī (Inf.),  dēvertī (Perf.), _to turn aside_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PERIPHRASTIC CONJUGATION.

115. There are two Periphrastic Conjugations,--the Active and the Passive.
The Active is formed by combining the Future Active Participle with the
auxiliary sum, the Passive by combining the Gerundive with the same
auxiliary.

                      Active Periphrastic Conjugation.

                              INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Pres._     amātūrus (-a, -um) sum, _I am about to love_.
  _Inf._      amātūrus eram, _I was about to love_.
  _Fut._      amātūrus erō, _I shall be about to love_.
  _Perf._     amātūrus fuī, _I have been (was) about to love_.
  _Plup._     amātūrus fueram, _I had been about to love_.
  _Fut. P._   amātūrus fuerō, _I shall have been about to love_.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._     amātūrus sim, _may I be about to love_.
  _Imp._      amātūrus essem, _I should be about to love_.
  _Perf._     amātūrus fuerim, _I may have been about to love_.
  _Plup._     amātūrus fuissem, _I should have been about to love_.

                                INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._     amātūrus esse, _to be about to love_.
  _Perf._     amātūrus fuisse, _to have been about to love_.

                     Passive Periphrastic Conjugation.

                                INDICATIVE.
  _Pres._     amandus (-a, -um) sum, _I am to be loved_, _must be loved_.
  _Imp._      amandus eram, _I was to be loved_.
  _Fut._      amandus erō, _I shall deserve to be loved_.
  _Perf._     amandus fuī, _I was to be loved_.
  _Plup._     amandus fueram, _I had deserved to be loved_.
  _Fut. P._   amandus fuerō, _I shall have deserved to be loved_.

                                SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._     amandus sim, _may I deserve to be loved_.
  _Imp._      amandus essem, _I should deserve to be loved_.
  _Perf._     amandus fuerim, _I may have deserved to be loved_.
  _Plup._     amendus fuissem, _I should have deserved to be loved_.

                                INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._     amandus esse, _to deserve to be loved_.
  _Perf._     amantus fuisse, _to have deserved to be loved_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PECULIARITIES OF CONJUGATION.

116. 1. Perfects in -āvī, -ēvī, and -īvī, with the forms derived from them,
often drop the ve or vi before endings beginning with r or s. So also nōvī
(from nōscō) and the compounds of mōvī (from moveō). Thus:--

  amāvistī      amāstī            dēlēvistī     dēlēstī
  amāvisse      amāsse            dēlēvisse     dēlēsse
  amāvērunt     amārunt           dēlēvērunt    dēlērunt
  amāverim      amārim            dēlēverim     dēlērim
  amāveram      amāram            dēlēveram     dēlēram
  amāverō       amārō             dēlēverō      dēlērō
  nōvistī       nōstī             nōverim       nōrim
  nōvisse       nōsse             nōveram       nōram
  audīvistī     audīstī           audīvisse     audīsse

2. In the Gerund and Gerundive of the Third and Fourth Conjugations, the
endings -undus, -undī, often occur instead of -endus and -endī, as
faciundus, faciundī.

3. Dīcō, dūcō, faciō, form the Imperatives, dīc, dūc, fac. But compounds of
faciō form the Imperative in -fice, as cōnfice. Compounds of dīcō, dūcō,
accent the ultima; as, ēdū´c, ēdī´c.

4. Archaic and Poetic forms:--

  a. The ending -ier in the Present Infinitive Passive; as, amārier,
  monērier, dīcier, for amārī, monērī, dīcī.

  b. The ending -ībam for -iēbam in Imperfects of the Fourth Conjugation,
  and -ībō for -iam in Futures; as, scībam, scībō, for sciēbam, sciam.

  c. Instead of the fuller forms, in such words as dīxistī, scrīpsistis,
  surrēxisse, we sometimes find dīxtī, scrīpstis, surrēxe, etc.

  d. The endings -im, -īs, etc. (for -am, -ās, etc.) occur in a few
  Subjunctive forms; as, edim (_eat_), duint, perduint.

5. In the Future Active and Perfect Passive Infinitive, the auxiliary esse
is often omitted; as, āctūrum for ācturum esse; ējectus for ējectus esse.

       *       *       *       *       *

FORMATION OF THE VERB STEMS.

Formation of the Present Stem.

117. Many verbs employ the simple Verb Stem for the Present Stem;[39] as,
dīcere, amāre, monēre, audīre. Others modify the Verb Stem to form the
Present, as follows:--

1. By appending the vowels, ā, ē, ī; as,--

            Present Stem   Verb Stem
  juvāre,      juvā-         juv-.
  augēre,      augē-         aug-.
  vincīre,     vincī-        vinc-.

2. By adding i, as capiō, Present Stem capi- (Verb Stem cap-).

3. By the insertion of n (m before labial-mutes) before the final consonant
of the Verb Stem; as, fundō (Stem fud-), rumpō (Stem rup-).

4. By appending -n to the Verb Stem; as,--

  cern-ō                    pell-ō (for pel-nō).

5. By appending t to the Verb Stem; as,--

             flect-ō.

6. By appending sc to the Verb Stem; as,--

  crēsc-ō.                  scīsc-ō.

7. By Reduplication, that is, by prefixing the initial consonant of the
Verb Stem with i; as,--

  gi-gn-ō (root gen-),      si-st-ō (root sta-).

Formation of the Perfect Stem.

118. The Perfect Stem is formed from the Verb Stem--

1. By adding v (in case of Vowel Stems); as,--

  amāv-ī,          dēlēv-ī,         audīv-ī.

2. By adding u (in case of some Consonant Stems); as,--

  strepu-ī,        genu-ī,          alu-ī.

3. By adding s (in case of most Consonant Stems); as,--

  carp-ō,    Perfect  carps-ī.
  scrīb-ō,      "     scrīps-ī (for scrīb-sī).
  rīd-eō,       "     rīs-ī (for rīd-sī).
  sent-iō,      "     sēns-ī (for sent-sī).
  dīc-ō,        "     dīx-ī (i.e. dīc-sī).

  a. Note that before the ending -sī a Dental Mute (t, d) is lost; a
  Guttural Mute (c, g) unites with s to form x; while the Labial b is
  changed to p.

4. Without addition. Of this formation there are three types:--

  a) The Verb Stem is reduplicated by prefixing the initial consonant with
  the following vowel or e; as,--

  currō,     Perfect  cu-currī.
  poscō,        "     po-poscī.
  pellō,        "     pe-pulī.

NOTE 1.--Compounds, with the exception of dō, stō, sistō, discō, poscō,
omit the reduplication. Thus: com-pulī, but re-poposcī.

NOTE 2.--Verbs beginning with sp or st retain both consonants in the
reduplication, but drop s from the stem; as, spondeō, spo-pondī; stō,
stetī.

  b) The short vowel of the Verb Stem is lengthened; as, legō, lēgī; agō,
  ēgī. Note that ă by this process becomes ē.

  c) The vowel of the Verb Stem is unchanged; as, vertō, vertī; minuō,
  minuī.

Formation of the Participial Stem.

119. The Perfect Passive Participle, from which the Participial Stem is
derived by dropping -us, is formed:--

1. By adding -tus (sometimes to the Present Stem, sometimes to the Verb
Stem); as,--

  amā-re,      Participle  amā-tus.
  dēlē-re,         "       dēlē-tus,
  audī-re,         "       audī-tus,
  leg-ere,         "       lēc-tus,
  scrīb-ere,       "       scrīp-tus,
  sentī-re,        "       sēn-sus (for sent-tus).
  caed-ere,        "       cae-sus (for caed-tus).

  a. Note that g, before t, becomes c (see § 8, 5); b becomes p; while dt
  or tt becomes ss, which is then often simplified to s (§ 8, 2).

2. After the analogy of Participles like sēnsus and caesus, where -sus
arises by phonetic change, -sus for -tus is added to other Verb Stems;
as,--

  lāb-ī,       Participle  lāp-sus.
  fīg-ere,         "       fī-xus.

  a. The same consonant changes occur in appending this ending -sus to the
  stem as in the case of the Perfect ending -si (see § 118, 3, a).

3. A few Verbs form the Participle in -ĭtus; as,--

  domā-re,         dom-ĭtus.
  monē-re,         mon-ĭtus.

4. The Future Active Participle is usually identical in its stem with the
Perfect Passive Participle; as, amā-tus, amātūrus; moni-tus, monitūrus.
But--

  juvā-re,  Perf. Partic.  jūtus,     has Fut. Act. Partic.  juvātūrus.[40]
  lavā-re,   "      "      lautus,        "    "      "      lavātūrus.
  par-ere,   "      "      partus,        "    "      "      paritūrus.
  ru-ere,    "      "      rutus,         "    "      "      ruitūrus.
  secă-re,   "      "      sectus,        "    "      "      secātūrus.
  fru-ĭ,     "      "      frūctus,       "    "      "      fruitūrus.
  mor-ī,     "      "      mortuus,       "    "      "      moritūrus.
  orī-rī,    "      "      ortus,         "    "      "      oritūrus.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIST OF THE MOST IMPORTANT VERBS, WITH PRINCIPAL PARTS.

First (_Ā_-) Conjugation.

120. I. PERFECT IN -VĪ.

  amō         amāre       amāvī       amātus           _love_

  All regular verbs of the First Conjugation follow this model.

  pōtō        pōtāre      pōtāvī      pōtus (§ 114,    _drink_
                                      2)

II. PERFECT IN -UĪ.

  crepō       crepāre     crepuī      crepitūrus       _rattle_
  cubō        cubāre      cubuī       cubitūrus        _lie down_
  domō        domāre      domuī       domitus          _tame_
  fricō       fricāre     fricuī      frictus _and_    _rub_
                                      fricātus
  micō        micāre      micuī       ----             _glitter_
    dīmicō    dīmicāre    dīmicāvī    dīmicātum        _fight_
                                      (est)[41]
  ex-plicō    explicāre   explicāvī   explicātus       _unfold_
                          (-uī)       (-itus)
  im-plicō    implicāre   implicāvī   implicātus       _entwine_
                          (-uī)       (-itus)
  secō        secāre      secuī       sectus           _cut_
  sonō        sonāre      sonuī       sonātūrus        _sound_
  tonō        tonāre      tonuī       ----             _thunder_
  vetō        vetāre      vetuī       vetitus          _forbid_

III. PERFECT IN -Ī WITH LENGTHENING OF THE STEM VOWEL.

  juvō        juvāre      jūvī        jūtus            _help_
  lavō        lavāre      lāvī        lautus           _wash_

IV. PERFECT REDUPLICATED.

  stō         stāre       stetī       stātūrus

V. DEPONENTS.

  These are all regular, and follow _mīror_, _mīrārī_, _mīrātus sum_.

Second (_Ē_-) Conjugation.

121. I. PERFECT IN -VĪ.

  dēleō       dēlēre      dēlēvī      dēlētus          _destroy_
  fleō        flēre       flēvī       flētus           _weep_, _lament_
  com-pleō[42]  complēre  complēvī    complētus        _fill up_
  aboleō      abolēre     abolēvī     abolitus         _destroy_
  cieō[43]    ciēre       cīvī        citus            _set in motion_

II. PERFECT IN -UĪ.

a. Type -eō, -ēre, -uī, -itus.

  arceō       arcēre      arcuī                        _keep off_
    coerceō   coercēre    coercuī     coercitus        _hold in check_
    exerceō   exercēre    exercuī     exercitus        _practise_
  caleō       calēre      caluī       calitūrus        _be warm_
  careō       carēre      caruī       caritūrus        _be without_
  doleō       dolēre      doluī       dolitūrus        _grieve_
  habeō       habēre      habuī       habitus          _have_
    dēbeō     dēbēre      dēbuī       dēbitus          _owe_
    praebeō   praebēre    praebuī     praebitus        _offer_
  jaceō       jacēre      jacuī       jacitūrus        _lie_
  mereō       merēre      meruī       meritus          _earn_, _deserve_
  moneō       monēre      monuī       monitus          _advise_
  noceō       nocēre      nocuī       nocitum (est)    _injure_
  pāreō       pārēre      pāruī       pāritūrus        _obey_
  placeō      placēre     placuī      placitūrus       _please_
  taceō       tacēre      tacuī       tacitūrus        _be silent_
  terreō      terrēre     terruī      territus         _frighten_
  valeō       valēre      valuī       valitūrus        _be strong_

             NOTE 1.--The following lack the Participial Stem:--
  egeō        egēre       eguī        ----             _want_
  ēmineō      ēminēre     ēminuī      ----             _stand forth_
  flōreō      flōrēre     flōruī      ----             _bloom_
  horreō      horrēre     horruī      ----             _bristle_
  lateō       latēre      latuī       ----             _lurk_
  niteō       nitēre      nituī       ----             _gleam_
  oleō        olēre       oluī        ----             _smell_
  palleō      pallēre     palluī      ----             _be pale_
  pateō       patēre      patuī       ----             _lie open_
  rubeō       rubēre      rubuī       ----             _be red_
  sileō       silēre      siluī       ----             _be silent_
  splendeō    splendēre   splenduī    ----             _gleam_
  studeō      studēre     studuī      ----             _study_
  stupeō      stupēre     stupuī      ----             _be amazed_
  timeō       timēre      timuī       ----             _fear_
  torpeō      torpēre     torpuī      ----             _be dull_
  vigeō       vigēre      viguī       ----             _flourish_
  vireō       virēre      viruī       ----             _be green_
                      and others.

        NOTE 2.--The following are used only in the Present System:--
  aveō        avēre       ----        ----             _wish_
  frīgeō      frīgēre     ----        ----             _be cold_
  immineō     imminēre    ----        ----             _overhang_
  maereō      maerēre     ----        ----             _mourn_
  polleō      pollēre     ----        ----             _be strong_
                      and others.

b. Type -eō, -ēre, -uī, -tus (-sus).

  cēnseō      cēnsēre     cēnsuī      cēnsus           _estimate_
  doceō       docēre      docuī       doctus           _teach_
  misceō      miscēre     miscuī      mixtus           _mix_
  teneō       tenēre      tenuī       ----             _hold_
    So _contineō_ and _sustineō_; but--
    retineō   retinēre    retinuī     retentus         _retain_
    obtineō   obtinēre    obtinuī     obtentus         _maintain_
  torreō      torrēre     torruī      tostus           _bake_

III. PERFECT IN -SĪ.

  augeō       augēre      auxī        auctus           _increase_
  torqueō     torquēre    torsī       tortus           _twist_
  indulgeō    indulgēre   indulsī     ----             _indulge_
  lūceō       lūcēre      lūxī        ----             _be light_
  lūgeō       lūgēre      lūxī        ----             _mourn_
  jubeō       jubēre      jussī       jussus           _order_
  per-mulceō  permulcēre  permulsī    permulsus        _soothe_
  rīdeō       rīdēre      rīsī        rīsum (est)      _laugh_
  suādeō      suādēre     suāsī       suāsum (est)     _advise_
  abs-tergeō  abstergēre  abstersī    abstersus        _wipe off_
  ārdeō       ārdēre      ārsī        ārsūrus          _burn_
  haereō      haerēre     haesī       haesūrus         _stick_
  maneō       manēre      mānsī       mānsūrus         _stay_
  algeō       algēre      alsī        ----             _be cold_
  fulgeō      fulgēre     fulsī       ----             _gleam_
  urgeō       urgēre      ursī        ----             _press_

IV. PERFECT IN -Ī WITH REDUPLICATION.

  mordeō      mordēre     momordī     morsus           _bite_
  spondeō     spondēre    spopondī    spōnsus          _promise_
  tondeō      tondēre     totondī     tōnsus           _shear_
  pendeō      pendēre     pependī     ----             _hang_

V. PERFECT IN -Ī WITH LENGTHENING OF STEM VOWEL.

  caveō       cavēre      cāvī        cautūrus         _take care_
  faveō       favēre      fāvī        fautūrus         _favor_
  foveō       fovēre      fōvī        fōtus            _cherish_
  moveō       movēre      mōvī        mōtus            _move_
  paveō       pavēre      pāvī        ----             _fear_
  sedeō       sedēre      sēdī        sessūrus         _sit_
  videō       vidēre      vīdī        vīsus            _see_
  voveō       vovēre      vōvī        vōtus            _vow_

VI. PERFECT IN -Ī WITHOUT EITHER REDUPLICATION OR LENGTHENING OF STEM
VOWEL.

  ferveō      fervēre     (fervī,     ----             _boil_
                          ferbuī)
  prandeō     prandēre    prandī      prānsus (§ 114,  _lunch_
                                      2)
  strīdeō     strīdēre    strīdī      ----             _creak_

VII. DEPONENTS.

  liceor      licērī      licitus sum      _bid_
    polliceor  pollicērī  pollicitus sum   _promise_
  mereor      merērī      meritus sum      _earn_
  misereor    miserērī    miseritus sum    _pity_
  vereor      verērī      veritus sum      _fear_
  fateor      fatērī      fassus sum       _confess_
    cōnfiteor  cōnfitērī  cōnfessus sum    _confess_
  reor        rērī        ratus sum        _think_
  medeor      medērī      ----             _heal_
  tueor       tuērī       ----             _protect_

Third (Consonant) Conjugation.

122. I. VERBS WITH PRESENT STEM ENDING IN A CONSONANT.

1. Perfect in -sī.

a. Type -ō, -ĕre, -sī, -tus.

  carpō       carpere     carpsī      carptus          _pluck_
  sculpō      sculpere    sculpsī     sculptus         _chisel_
  rēpō        rēpere      rēpsī       ----             _creep_
  serpō       serpere     serpsī      ----             _crawl_
  scribō      scribere    scrīpsī     scrīptus         _write_
  nūbō        nūbere      nūpsī       nūpta (woman     _marry_
                                      only)
  regō        regere      rēxī        rēctus           _govern_
  tegō        tegere      tēxī        tēctus           _cover_
  af-flīgō    afflīgere   afflīxī     afflīctus        _shatter_
  dīcō        dīcere      dīxī        dictus           _say_
  dūcō        dūcere      dūxī        ductus           _lead_
  coquō       coquere     coxī        coctus           _cook_
  trahō       trahere     trāxī       trāctus          _draw_
  vehō        vehere      vexī        vectus           _carry_
  cingō       cingere     cīnxī       cīnctus          _gird_
  tingō       tingere     tīnxī       tīnctus          _dip_
  jungō       jungere     jūnxī       jūnctus          _join_
  fingō       fingere     fīnxī       fīctus           _would_
  pingō       pingere     pīnxī       pīctus           _paint_
  stringō     stringere   strīnxī     strictus         _bind_
  -stinguō[44]  -stinguere  -stīnxī   -stīnctus        _blot out_
  unguō       unguere     ūnxī        ūnctus           _anoint_
  vīvō        vīvere      vīxī        vīctum (est)     _live_
  gerō        gerere      gessī       gestus           _carry_
  urō         ūrere       ussī        ūstus            _burn_
  temnō       temnere     con-tempsī  con-temptus      _despise_

b. Type -ō, -ĕre, -sī, -sus.

  fīgō        fīgere      fīxī        fīxus            _fasten_
  mergō       mergere     mersī       mersus           _sink_
  spargō      spargere    sparsī      sparsus          _scatter_
  flectō      flectere    flexī       flexus           _bend_
  nectō       nectere     nexuī       nexus            _twine_
                          (nexī)
  mittō       mittere     mīsī        missus           _send_
  rādō        rādere      rāsī        rāsus            _shave_
  rōdō        rōdere      rōsī        rōsus            _gnaw_
  vādō        vādere      -vāsī[45]   -vāsum           _march_, _walk_
                                      (est)[45]
  lūdō        lūdere      lūsī        lūsum (est)      _play_
  trūdō       trūdere     trūsī       trūsus           _push_
  laedō       laedere     laesī       laesus           _injure_, _hurt_
  claudō      claudere    clausī      clausus          _close_
  plaudō      plaudere    plausī      plausum (est)    _clap_
    explōdō   explōdere   explōsī     explōsus         _hoot off_
  cēdō        cēdere      cessī       cessum (est)     _withdraw_
  dīvidō      dīvidere    dīvīsī      dīvīsus          _divide_
  premō       premere     pressī      pressus          _press_

2. Perfect in -ī with Reduplication.

  ab-dō       abdere      abdidī      abditus          _conceal_
  red-dō      red-dere    reddidī     redditus         _return_
     So _addō_, _condō_, _dēdō_, _perdō_, _prōdō_,
                     _trādō_, etc.
  cōn-sistō   cōnsistere  cōnstitī    ----             _take one's stand_
  resistō     resistere   restitī     ----             _resist_
  circumsistō  circumsistere  circumstetī  ----        _surround_
  cadō        cadere      cecidī      cāsūrus          _fall_
  caedō       caedere     cecīdī      caesus           _kill_
  pendō       pendere     pependī     pēnsus           _weigh_, _pay_
  tendō       tendere     tetendī     tentus           _stretch_
  tundō       tundere     tutudī      tūsus, tūnsus    _beat_
  fallō       fallere     fefellī     (falsus, as      _deceive_
                                      Adj.)
  pellō       pellere     pepulī      pulsus           _drive out_
  currō       currere     cucurrī     cursum (est)     _run_
  parcō       parcere     pepercī     parsūrus         _spare_
  canō        canere      cecinī      ----             _sing_
  tangō       tangere     tetigī      tāctus           _touch_
  pungō       pungere     pupugī      pūnctus          _prick_

  NOTE.--In the following verbs the perfects were originally reduplicated,
  but have lost the reduplicating syllable:--
  per-cellō   percellere  perculī     perculsus        _strike down_
  findō       findere     fidī        fissus           _split_
  scindō      scindere    scidī       scissus          _tear apart_
  tollō       tollere     sus-tulī    sublātus         _remove_

3. Perfect in -ī with Lengthening of Stem Vowel.

  agō         agere       ēgī         āctus            _drive_, _do_
    peragō    peragere    perēgī      perāctus         _finish_
    subigō    subigere    subēgī      subāctus         _subdue_
    cōgō      cōgere      coēgī       coāctus          _force_, _gather_
  frangō      frangere    frēgī       frāctus          _break_
    perfringō  perfringere  perfrēgī  perfrāctus       _break down_
  legō        legere      lēgī        lēctus           _gather_, _read_
    perlegō   perlegere   perlēgī     perlēctus        _read through_
    colligō   colligere   collēgī     collēctus        _collect_
    dēligō    dēligere    dēlēgī      dēlēctus         _choose_
    dīligō    dīligere    dīlēxī      dīlēctus         _love_
    intellegō  intellegere  intellēxī  intellēctus     _understand_
    neglegō   neglegere   neglēxī     neglēctus        _neglect_
  emō         emere       ēmī         ēmptus           _buy_
    coëmō     coëmere     coēmī       coēmptus         _buy up_
    redimō    redimere    redēmī      redēmptus        _buy back_
    dirimō    dirimere    dirēmī      dirēmptus        _destroy_
    dēmō      dēmere      dēmpsī      dēmptus          _take away_
    sūmō      sūmere      sūmpsī      sūmptus          _take_
    prōmō     prōmere     prōmpsī     (prōmptus, as    _take out_
                                      Adj.)
  vincō       vincere     vīcī        victus           _conquer_
  re-linquō   relinquere  relīquī     relīctus         _leave_
  rumpō       rumpere     rūpī        ruptus           _break_
  edō         ēsse (§     ēdī         ēsus             _eat_
              128)
  fundō       fundere     fūdī        fūsus            _four_

4. Perfect in -ī without either Reduplication or Lengthening of Stem Vowel.

  excūdō      excūdere    excūdī      excūsus          _hammer_
  cōnsīdō     cōnsīdere   cōnsēdī     ----             _take one's seat_
  possīdō     possīdere   possēdī     possessus        _take possession_
  accendō     accendere   accendī     accēnsus         _kindle_
  a-scendō    ascendere   ascendī     ascēnsum (est)   _climb_
  dē-fendō    dēfendere   dēfendī     dēfēnsus         _defend_
  pre-hendō   prehendere  prehendī    prehēnsus        _seize_
  īcō         īcere       īcī         ictus            _strike_
  vellō       vellere     vellī       vulsus           _pluck_
  vertō       vertere     vertī       versus           _turn_
  pandō       pandere     pandī       passus           _spread_
  solvō       solvere     solvī       solūtus          _loose_
  vīsō        vīsere      vīsī        vīsus            _visit_
  volvō       volvere     volvī       volūtus          _roll_
  verrō       verrere     verrī       versus           _sweep_

5. Perfect in -uī.

  in-cumbō    incumbere   incubuī     incubitūrus      _lean on_
  gignō       gignere     genuī       genitus          _bring forth_
  molō        molere      moluī       molitus          _grind_
  vomō        vomere      vomuī       vomitus          _vomit_
  fremō       fremere     fremuī      ----             _snort_
  gemō        gemere      gemuī       ----             _sigh_
  metō        metere      messuī      messus           _reap_
  tremō       tremere     tremuī      ----             _tremble_
  strepō      strepere    strepuī     ----             _rattle_
  alō         alete       aluī        altus (alitus)   _nourish_
  colō        colere      coluī       cultus           _cultivate_
    incolō    incolere    incoluī     ----             _inhabit_
    excolō    excolere    excoluī     excultus         _perfect_
  cōnsulō     cōnsulere   cōnsuluī    cōnsultus        _consult_
  cōnserō     cōnserere   cōnseruī    cōnsertus        _join_
  dēserō      dēserere    dēseruī     dēsertus         _desert_
  disserō     disserere   disseruī    ----             _discourse_
  texō        texere      texuī       textus           _weave_

6. Perfect in -vī.

  sinō        sinere      sīvī        situs            _allow_
    desinō    dēsinere    dēsiī       dēsitus          _cease_
    ponō      pōnere      posuī       positus          _place_
  ob-linō     oblinere    oblēvī      oblitus          _smear_
  serō        serere      sēvī        satus            _sow_
    cōnserō   cōnserere   cōnsēvī     cōnsitus         _plant_
  cernō       cernere     ----        ----             _separate_
    discernō  discernere  discrēvī    discrētus        _distinguish_
    dēcernō   dēcernere   dēcrēvī     dēcrētus         _decide_
  spernō      spernere    sprēvī      sprētus          _scorn_
  sternō      sternere    strāvī      strātus          _spread_
    prō-sternō  prōsternere  prōstrāvī  prōstrātus     _overthrow_
  petō        petere      petīvī      petītus          _seek_
                          (petiī)
    appetō    appetere    appetīvī    appetītus        _long for_
  terō        terere      trīvī       trītus           _rub_
  quaerō      quaerere    quaesīvī    quaesītus        _seek_
    acquīrō   acquīrere   acquīsīvī   acquīsītus       _acquire_
  arcessō     arcessere   arcessīvī   arcessītus       _summon_
  capessō     capessere   capessīvī   capessītus       _seize_
  lacessō     lacessere   lacessīvī   lacessītus       _provoke_

7. Used only in Present System.

  angō        angere      ----        ----             _choke_
  lambō       lambere     ----        ----             _lick_
  claudō      claudere    ----        ----             _be lame_
  furō        furere      ----        ----             _rave_
  vergō       vergere     ----        ----             _bend_
                   and a few others.

II. VERBS WITH PRESENT STEM ENDING IN -U.

  induō       induere     induī       indūtus          _put on_
  imbuō       imbuere     imbuī       imbūtus          _moisten_
  luō         luere       luī         ----             _wash_
    polluō    polluere    polluī      pollūtus         _defile_
  minuō       minuere     minuī       minūtus          _lessen_
  statuō      statuere    statuī      statūtus         _set up_
    cōnstituō  cōnstituere  cōnstituī  cōnstitūtus     _determine_
  suō         suere       suī         sūtus            _sew_
  tribuō      tribuere    tribuī      tribūtus         _allot_
  ruō         ruere       ruī         ruitūrus         _fall_
    dīruō     dīruere     dīruī       dīrutus          _destroy_
    obruō     obruere     obruī       obrutus          _overwhelm_
  acuō        acuere      acuī        ----             _sharpen_
  arguō       arguere     arguī       ----             _accuse_
  congruō     congruere   congruī     ----             _agree_
  metuō       metuere     metuī       ----             _fear_
  ab-nuō      abnuere     abnuī       ----             _decline_
  re-spuō     respuere    respuī      ----             _reject_
  struō       struere     strūxī      strūctus         _build_
  fluō        fluere      flūxi       (flūxus, as      _flow_
                                      Adj.)

III. VERBS WITH PRESENT STEM ENDING IN -I.

  capiō       cupere      cupīvī      cupītus          _wish_
  sapiō       sapere      sapīvī      ----             _taste_
  rapiō       rapere      rapuī       raptus           _snatch_
    dīripiō   dīripere    dīripuī     dīreptus         _plunder_
  cōnspiciō   cōnspicere  cōnspexī    cōnspectus       _gaze at_
  aspiciō     aspicere    aspexī      aspectus         _behold_
  illiciō     illicere    illexī      illectus         _allure_
  pelliciō    pellicere   pellexī     pellectus        _allure_
  ēliciō      ēlicere     ēlicuī      ēlicitus         _elicit_
  quatiō      quatere     ----        quassus          _shake_
    concutiō  concutere   concussī    concussus        _shake_
  pariō       parere      peperī      partus           _bring forth_
  capiō       capere      cēpī        captus           _take_
    accipiō   accipere    accēpī      acceptus         _accept_
    incipiō   incipere    incēpī      inceptus         _begin_
  faciō       facere      fēcī        factus           _make_
    afficiō   afficere    affēcī      affectus         _affect_
      _Passive_, afficior, afficī, affectus sum.
  So other prepositional compounds, _perficiō_, _perficior_; _interficiō_,
  _interficior_; etc. But--
  assuēfaciō  assuēfacere  assuēfēcī  assuēfactus      _accustom_
   _Passive_, assuēfiō, assuēfieri, assuēfactus sum.
  So also _patefaciō_, _patefīō_; _calefaciō_, _calefīō_; and all
  non-prepositional compounds.
  jaciō       jacere      jēcī        jactus           _hurl_
    abiciō    abicere     abjēcī      abjectus         _throw away_
  fodiō       fodere      fōdī        fossus           _dig_
  fugiō       fugere      fūgī        fugitūrus        _flee_
    effugiō   effugere    effūgī      ----             _escape_

IV. VERBS IN -SCŌ.

1. Verbs in -scō from Simple Roots.

  poscō       poscere     poposcī     ----             _demand_
  discō       discere     didicī      ----             _learn_
  pāscō       pāscere     pāvī        pāstus           _feed_
    pāscor    pāscī       pāstus sum                   _graze_
  crēscō      crēscere    crēvī       crētus           _grow_
  cōnsuēscō   cōnsuēscere  cōnsuēvī   cōnsuētus        _accustom one's
                                                       self_
  quiēscō     quiēscere   quiēvī      quiētūrus        _be still_
  adolēscō    adolēscere  adolēvi     adultus          _grow up_
  obsolēscō   obsolēscerē  obsolēvī   ----             _grow old_
  nōscō       nōscere     nōvī        ----             _become acquainted
                                                       with_
    ignōscō   ignōscere   ignōvī      ignōtūrus        _pardon_
  agnōscō     agnōscere   agnōvī      agnitus          _recognize_
  cognōscō    cognōscere  cognōvī     cognitus         _get acquainted
                                                       with_

2. Verbs in -scō formed from other Verbs.

These usually have Inchoative or Inceptive meaning (see § 155, 1). When
they have the Perfect, it is the same as that of the Verbs from which they
are derived.

  flōrēscō    flōrēscere  flōruī      _begin to        (flōreō)
                                      bloom_
  scīscō      scīscere    scīvī       _enact_          (scīo)
  ārēscō      ārēscere    āruī        _become dry_     (āreō)
  calēscō     calēscere   caluī       _become hot_     (caleō)
  cōnsenēscō  cōnsenēscere  cōnsenuī  _grow old_       (seneō)
  extimēscō   extimēscere  extimuī    _fear greatly_   (timeō)
  ingemīscō   ingemīscere  ingemuī    _sigh_           (gemō)
  adhaerēscō  adhaerēscere  adhaesī   _stick_          (haereō)

3. Verbs in -scō derived from Adjectives, usually with Inchoative meaning.

  obdūrēscō   obdūrēscere  obdūruī    _grow hard_      (dūrus)
  ēvanēscō    ēvanēscere  ēvinuī      _disappear_      (vānus)
  percrēbrēsco  percrēbrēscere  percrēbruī  _grow fresh_  (crēber)
  mātūrescō   mātūrēscere  mātūruī    _grow ripe_      (mātūrus)
  obmūtēscō   obmūtēscere  obmūtuī    _grow dumb_      (mūtus)

V. DEPONENTS.

  fungor      fungi       fūnctus sum      _perform_
  queror      querī       questus sum      _complain_
  loquor      loquī       locūtus sum      _speak_
  sequor      sequī       secūtus sum      _follow_
  fruor       fruī        fruitūrus        _enjoy_
    perfruor  perfruī     perfrūctus sum   _thoroughly enjoy_
  lābor       lābi        lāpsus sum       _glide_
  amplector   amplectī    amplexus sum     _embrace_
  nītor       nītī        nīsus sum,       _strive_
                          nīxus sum
  gradior     gradī       gressus sum      _walk_
  patior      patī        passus sum       _suffer_
    perpetior  perpetī    perpessus sum    _endure_
  ūtor        ūtī         ūsus sum         _use_
  morior      morī        mortuus sum      _die_
  adipīscor   adipīscī    adeptus sum      _acquire_
  comminīscor  comminīscī  commentus sum   _invent_
  reminīscor  reminīscī   ----             _remember_
  nancīscor   nancīscī    nanctus          _acquire_
                          (nactus) sum
  nāscor      nāscī       nātus sum        _be born_
  oblīvīscor  oblīvīscī   oblītus sum      _forget_
  pacīscor    pacīscī     pactus sum       _covenant_
  proficīscor  proficīscī  profectus sum   _set out_
  ulcīscor    ulcīscī     ultus sum        _avenge_
  īrāscor     īrāscī      (īrātus, as      _be angry_
                          Adj.)
  vescor      vescī       ----             _eat_

Fourth Conjugation.

123. I. PERFECT ENDS IN -VĪ.

  audiō       audīre      audīvī      audītus          _hear_
    So all regular Verbs of the Fourth Conjugation.
  sepeliō     sepelīre    sepelīvī    sepultus         _bury_

II. PERFECT ENDS IN -UĪ.

  aperiō      aperīre     aperuī      apertus          _open_
  operiō      operīre     operuī      opertus          _cover_
  saliō       salīre      saluī       ----             _leap_

III. PERFECT ENDS IN -SĪ.

  saepiō      saepīre     saepsī      saeptus          _hedge in_
  sanciō      sancīre     sānxī       sānctus          _ratify_
  vinciō      vincīre     vinxī       vinctus          _bind_
  amiciō      amicīre     ----        amictus          _envelop_
  fulciō      fulcīre     fulsī       fultus           _prop up_
  referciō    refercīre   refersī     refertus         _fill_
  sarciō      sarcīre     sarsī       sartus           _patch_
  hauriō      haurīre     hausī       haustus          _draw_
  sentiō      sentīre     sēnsī       sēnsus           _feel_

IV. PERFECT IN -Ī WITH LENGTHENING OF STEM VOWEL.

  veniō       venīre      vēnī        ventum (est)     _come_
    adveniō   advenīre    advēnī      adventum (est)   _arrive_
    inveniō   invenīre    invēnī      inventus         _find_

V. PERFECT WITH LOSS OF REDUPLICATION.

  reperiō     reperīre    repperī     repertus         _find_
  comperiō    comperīre   comperī     compertus        _learn_

VI. USED ONLY IN THE PRESENT.

  feriō       ferīre      ----        ----             _strike_
  ēsuriō      ēsurīre     ----        ----             _be hungry_

VII. DEPONENTS.

  largior     largīrī     largītus sum     _bestow_
     So many others.
  experior    experīrī    expertus sum     _try_
  opperior    opperīrī    oppertus sum     _await_
  ōrdior      ōrdīrī      ōrsus sum        _begin_
  orior       orīrī       ortus sum        _arise_
  _Orior_ usually follows the Third Conjugation in its inflection; as
  _oreris_, _orĭtur_, _orĭmur_; _orerer_ (Imp. Subj.); _orere_ (Imper.).
  mētior      mētīrī      mēnsus sum       _measure_
  assentior   assentīrī   assēnsus sum     _assent_

       *       *       *       *       *

IRREGULAR VERBS.

124. A number of Verbs are called Irregular. The most important are sum,
dō, edō, ferō, volō, nōlō, mālō, eō, fīō. The peculiarity of these Verbs is
that they append the personal endings in many forms directly to the stem,
instead of employing a connecting vowel, as fer-s (2d Sing. of fer-ō),
instead of fer-i-s. They are but the relics of what was once in Latin a
large class of Verbs.

125. The Inflection of sum has already been given. Its various compounds
are inflected in the same way. They are--

  absum       abesse      āfuī             _am absent_
          _Pres. Partic_. absēns (absentis), _absent_.
  adsum       adesse      adfuī            _am present_
  dēsum       deesse      dēfuī            _am lacking_
  insum       inesse      īnfuī            _am in_
  intersum    interesse   interfuī         _am among_
  praesum     praeesse    praefuī          _am in charge of_
        _Pres. Partic_. praesēns (praesentis), _present_
  obsum       obesse      obfuī            _hinder_
  prōsum      prōdesse    prōfuī           _am of advantage_
  subsum      subesse     subfuī           _am underneath_
  supersum    superesse   superfuī         _am left_

NOTE.--Prōsum is compounded of prōd (earlier form of prō) and sum; the d
disappears before consonants, as prōsumus; but prōdestis.

126. Possum. In its Present System possum is a compound of pot- (for pote,
able) and sum; potuī is from an obsolete potēre.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  possum,     posse,      potuī,      _to be
                                      able_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    possum, potes, potest;          possumus, potestis, possunt.
  _Imp._     poteram;                        poterāmus.
  _Fut._     poterō;                         poterimus.
  _Perf._    potuī;                          potuimus.
  _Plup._    potueram;                       potuerāmus.
  _Fut. P._  potuerō;                        potuerimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    possim, possīs, possit;         possīmus, possītis, possint.
  _Imp._     possem;                         possēmus.
  _Perf._    potuerim;                       potuerīmus.
  _Plup._    potuissem;                      potuissēmus.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    posse.                  _Pres._  potēns (_as an adjective_).
  _Perf._    potuisse.

127. Dō, _I give_.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  dō,         dăre,       dedī,       dătus.


                                Active Voice.

                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    dō, dās, dat;                   dămus, dătis, dant.
  _Imp._     dăbam, etc.;                    dăbāmus.
  _Fut._     dăbō, etc.;                     dăbimus.
  _Perf._    dedī;                           dedimus.
  _Plup._    dederam;                        dederāmus.
  _Fut. P._  dederō;                         dederimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE
  _Pres._    dem;                            dēmus.
  _Imp._     dărem;                          dărēmus.
  _Perf._    dederim;                        dederīmus.
  _Plup._    dedissem;                       dedissēmus.

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    dā;                             dăte.
  _Fut._     dătō;                           dătōte.
             dătō.                           dantō.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    dăre.                           dāns.
  _Perf._    dedisse.
  _Fut._     dătūrus esse.                   dătūrus.

               GERUND.                              SUPINE.
             dandī, etc.                     dătum, dătū.

1. The passive is inflected regularly with the short vowel. Thus: dărī,
dătur, dărētur, etc.

2. The archaic and poetic Present Subjunctive forms duim, duint, perduit,
perduint, etc., are not from the root da-, but from du-, a collateral root
of similar meaning.

128. Edō, _I eat_.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  edō,        ēsse,       ēdī,        ēsus.


              Active Voice.

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Pres._     edō,          edimus,
              ēs,           ēstis,
              ēst;          edunt.

               SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Imp._      ēssem,        ēssēmus,
              ēssēs,        ēssētis,
              ēsset;        ēssent.

               IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._     ēs;           ēste.
  _Fut._      ēstō;         ēstōte.
              ēstō;         eduntō.

               INFINITIVE.
              _Pres._ ēsse.

              Passive Voice.

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
         _Pres. 3d Sing_. ēstur.

               SUBJUNCTIVE.
         _Imp. 3d Sing_. ēssētur.

1. Observe the long vowel of the forms in ēs-, which alone distinguishes
them from the corresponding forms of esse, _to be_.

2. Note comedō, comēsse, comēdī, comēsus or comēstus, _consume_.

3. The Present Subjunctive has edim, -īs, -it, etc., less often edam, -ās,
etc.

129. Ferō, _I bear_.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  ferō,       ferre,      tulī,       lātus.


                                Active Voice.

                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
                                                    PLURAL.
              SINGULAR.
  _Pres._    ferō, fers, fert;               ferimus, fertis, ferunt.[46]
  _Imp._     ferēbam;                        ferēbāmus.
  _Fut._     feram;                          ferēmus.
  _Perf._    tulī;                           tulimus.
  _Plup._    tuleram;                        tulerāmus.
  _Fut. P._  tulerō;                         tulerimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._    feram;                          ferāmus.
  _Imp._     ferrem;                         ferrēmus.
  _Perf._    tulerim;                        tulerīmus.
  _Plup._    tulissem;                       tulissēmus.

                                  IMPERATIVE
  _Pres._    fer;                            ferte.
  _Fut._     fertō;                          fertōte.
             fertō;                          feruntō.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    ferre.                  _Pres._  ferēns.
  _Perf._    tulisse.
  _Fut._     lātūrus esse.           _Fut._  lātūrus.

               GERUND.                              SUPINE.
  _Gen._     ferendī.
  _Dat._     ferendō.
  _Acc._     ferendum.               _Acc._  lātum.
  _Abl._     ferendō.                _Abl._  lātū.

                       Passive Voice.
  feror,      ferrī,      lātus sum,      _to be borne_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.
                                                    PLURAL.
              SINGULAR.
  _Pres._    feror, ferris, fertur;          ferimur, feriminī, feruntur.
  _Imp._     ferēbar;                        ferēbāmur.
  _Fut._     ferar;                          ferēmur.
  _Perf._    lātus sum;                      lātī sumus.
  _Plup._    lātus eram;                     lātī erāmus.
  _Fut. P._  lātus erō;                      lātī erimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._    ferar;                          ferāmur.
  _Imp._     ferrer;                         ferrēmur.
  _Perf._    lātus sim;                      lātī sīmus.
  _Plup._    lātus essem;                    lātī essēmus.

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    ferre;                          ferimimī.
  _Fut._     fertor;                         ----
             fertor;                         feruntor.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    ferrī.
  _Perf._    lātus esse.             _Perf._  lātus.
  _Fut._     lātum īrī.              _Fut._  ferendus.

So also the Compounds--

  afferō     afferre    attulī     allātus    _bring toward_
  auferō     auferre    abstulī    ablātus    _take away_
  cōnferō    cōnferre   contulī    collātus   _compare_
  differō    differre   distulī    dīlātus    _put off_
  efferō     efferre    extulī     ēlātus     _carry out_
  īnferō     īnferre    intulī     illātus    _bring against_
  offerō     offerre    obtulī     oblātus    _present_
  referō     referre    rettulī    relātus    _bring back_

NOTE.--The forms sustulī and sublātus belong to tollō.

130. volō, nōlō, mālō.

                        PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  volō,       velle,      voluī,      _to wish._
  nōlō,       nōlle,      nōluī,      _to be unwilling._
  mālō,       mālle,      māluī,      _to prefer._


                             INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Pres._     volō,               nōlō,               mālō,
              vīs,                nōn vīs,            māvīs,
              vult;               nōn vult;           māvult;
              volumus,            nōlumus,            mālumus,
              vultis,             nōn vultis,         māvultis,
              volunt.             nōlunt.             mālunt.
  _Imp._      volēbam.            nōlēbam.            mālēbam.
  _Fut._      volam.              nōlam.              mālam.
  _Perf._     voluī.              nōluī.              māluī.
  _Plup._     volueram.           nōlueram.           mālueram.
  _Fut. P._   voluerō.            nōluerō.            māluerō.

                               SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._     velim, -īs, -it,    nōlim.              mālīm.
              etc.
  _Inf._      vellem, -ēs, -et,   nōllem.             māllem.
              etc.
  _Perf._     voluerim.           nōluerim.           māluerim.
  _Pluf._     voluissem.          nōluissem.          māluissem.

                               IMPERATIVE.

                             _Pres._     nōlī;       nōlīte.
                             _Fut._      nōlītō;     nōlītōte.
                             nōlītō;     nōluntō.


                               INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._     velle.              nōlle.              mālle.
  _Perf._     voluisse.           nōluisse.           māluisse

                               PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._     volēns              nōlēns.             ----

131. Fīō.

                        PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  fīō,        fīerī,      factus sum,   _to become_, _be
                                        made_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.

              SINGULAR,                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    fīō, fīs, fit;                  fīmus, fītis, fīunt.
  _Inf._     fīēbam;                         fīēbāmus.
  _Fut._     fīam;                           fīēmus.
  _Perf._    factus sum;                     factī sumus.
  _Pluf._    factus eram;                    factī erāmus.
  _Fut. P._  factus erō;                     factī erimus.

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Pres._    fīam;                           fīāmus.
  _Imp._     fierem;                         fierēmus.
  _Perf._    factus sim;                     factī sīmus.
  _Plup._    factus essem;                   factī essēmus.

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    fī;                             fīte.
                                                  PARTICIPLE.
             INFINITIVE.
  _Pres._    fierī.
  _Perf._    factus esse.            _Perf._  factus.
  _Fut._     factum īrī.             _Ger._  faciendus.

NOTE.--A few isolated forms of compounds of fīō occur; as, dēfit _lacks_;
īnfit, _begins_.

132. Eō.

                  PRINCIPAL PARTS.
  eō,         īre,        īvī,        itum (est),   _to go_.


                               INDICATIVE MOOD.

              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    eō, īs, it;                     īmus, ītis, eunt.
  _Imp._     ībam;                           ībāmus.
  _Fut._     ībō;                            ībimus.
  _Perf._    īvī (iī);                       īvimus (iimus).
  _Plup._    īveram (ieram);                 īverāmus (ierāmus)
  _Fut. P._  īverō (ierō);                   īverimus (ierimus).

                                 SUBJUNCTIVE.

              SINGULAR.                             PLURAL.
  _Pres._    eam;                            eāmus.
  _Inf._     īrem;                           īrēmus.
  _Perf._    īverim (ierim);                 īverīmus (ierīmus).
  _Pluf._    īvissem (iissem, īssem);        īvissēmus (iissēmus, īssēmus).

                                 IMPERATIVE.
  _Pres._    ī;                              īte.
  _Fut._     ītō;                            ītōte,
             ītō;                            euntō.

             INFINITIVE.                          PARTICIPLE.
  _Pres._    īre.                    _Pres._  iēns.
  _Perf._    īvisse (īsse).                  (_Gen._ euntis.)
  _Fut._     itūrus esse.            _Fut._  itūrus.   _Gerundive_, eundum.

               GERUND.                              SUPINE.
             eundī, etc.                     itum, itū.

1. Transitive compounds of eō admit the full Passive inflection; as adeor,
adīris, adītur, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

DEFECTIVE VERBS.

Defective Verbs lack certain forms. The following are the most important:--

133. USED MAINLY IN THE PERFECT SYSTEM.


              Coepī,          Meminī,         Ōdī,
              _I have         _I remember_.   _I hate_.
              begun._

                       INDICATIVE MOOD.
  _Perf._     coepī.          meminī.         ōdī.
  _Plup._     coeperam.       memineram.      ōderam.
  _Fut. P._   coeperō.        meminerō.       ōderō.

                         SUBJUNCTIVE.
  _Perf._     coeperim.       meminerim.      ōderim.
  _Pluf._     coepissem.      meminissem.     ōdissem.

                         IMPERATIVE.
             _Sing._ mementō; _Plur._ mementōte.

                         INFINITIVE.
  _Perf._     coepisse.       meminisse.      ōdisse.
  _Fut._      coeptūrus esse.                 ōsūrus esse.

                         PARTICIPLE.
  _Perf._     coeptus, _begun_.               ōsus.
  _Fut._      coeptūrus.                      ōsūrus.

1. When coepī governs a Passive Infinitive it usually takes the form
coeptus est; as, amārī coeptus est, _he began to be loved_.

2. Note that meminī and ōdī, though Perfect in form, are Present in sense.
Similarly the Pluperfect and Future Perfect have the force of the Imperfect
and Future; as, memineram, _I remembered_; ōderō, _I shall hate_.

134. Inquam, _I say_ (inserted between words of a direct quotation)

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Pres._  inquam,        ----
          inquis,         ----
          inquit;         inquiunt.
  _Fut._  ----            ----
          inquiēs,        ----
          inquiet.        ----
         _Perf. 3d Sing._ inquit.

135. Ajō, _I say_.

             INDICATIVE MOOD.
          SINGULAR.       PLURAL
  _Pres._  ajō,           ----
          aīs,            ----
          ait;            ajunt.
  _Imp._  ajēbam,         ajēbāmus,
          ajēbās,         ajēbātis,
          ajēbat;         ajēbant.
           _Perf 3d Sing._ aït.

               SUBJUNCTIVE.

          _Pres 3d Sing._ ajat.

NOTE.--For aīsne, _do you mean?_ aīn is common.

136. Fārī, _to speak._

This is inflected regularly in the perfect tenses. In the Present System it
has--

                 INDICATIVE MOOD.
                  SINGULAR.       PLURAL.
  _Pres._         ----            ----
                  ----            ----
                  fātur.          ----
  _Fut._          fābor,          ----
                  ----            ----
                  fābitur.        ----
  _Impv._         fāre.
  _Inf._          fārī.
  _Pres.          fantis, fantī, etc.
  Partic._
  _Gerund_,       fandī; _D. and Abl._, fandō.
  _G._,
  _Gerundive_,    fandus.

NOTE.--Forms of fārī are rare. More frequent are its compounds; as,--
affātur, _he addresses_; praefāmur, _we say in advance._

137. OTHER DEFECTIVE FORMS.

1. Queō, quīre, quīvī, _to be able_, and nequeō, nequīre, nequīvī, _to be
unable_, are inflected like eō, but occur chiefly in the Present Tense, and
there only in special forms.

2. Quaesō, _I entreat_; quaesumus, _we entreat_.

3. Cedo (2d sing. Impv.), cette (2d plu.); _give me_, _tell me_.

4. Salvē, salvēte, _hail_. Also Infinitive, salvēre.

5. Havē (avē), havēte, _hail_. Also Infinitive, havēre.

       *       *       *       *       *

IMPERSONAL VERBS.

138. Impersonal Verbs correspond to the English, _it snows, it seems, etc._
They have no personal subject, but may take an Infinitive, a Clause, or a
Neuter Pronoun; as, mē pudet hōc fēcisse, lit. _it shames me to have done
this_; hōc decet, _this is fitting_. Here belong--

I. Verbs denoting operations of the weather; as,--

  fulget        fulsit        _it lightens_
  tonat         tonuit        _it thunders_
  grandinat     ----          _it hails_
  ningit        ninxit        _it snows_
  pluit         pluit         _it rains_

II. Special Verbs.

  paenitet      paenitēre     paenituit     _it repents_
  piget         pigēre        piguit        _it grieves_
  pudet         pudēre        puduit        _it causes shame_
  taedet        taedēre       taeduit       _it disgusts_
  miseret       miserēre      miseruit      _it causes pity_
  libet         libēre        libuit        _it pleases_
  licet         licēre        licuit        _it is lawful_
  oportet       oportēre      oportuit      _it is fitting_
  decet         decēre        decuit        _it is becoming_
  dēdecet       dēdecēre      dēdecuit      _it is unbecoming_
  rēfert        rēferre       rētulit       _it concerns_

III. Verbs Impersonal only in Special Senses.

  cōnstat       cōnstāre      cōnstitit     _it is evident_
  praestat      praestāre     praestitit    _it is better_
  juvat         juvāre        jūvit         _it delights_
  appāret       appārēre      appāruit      _it appears_
  placet        placēre       placuit       _it pleases_
                              (placitum
                              est)
  accēdit       accēdere      accessit      _it is added_
  accidit       accidere      accidit       _it happens_
  contingit     contingere    contigit      _it happens_
  ēvenit        ēvenīre       ēvēnit        _it turns out_
  interest      interesse     interfuit     _it concerns_

IV. The Passive of Intransitive Verbs; as,--

  ītur                lit. _it is gone_         _i.e. some one goes_
  curritur            lit. _it is run_          _i.e. some one runs_
  ventum est          lit. _it has been come_   _i.e. some one has come_
  veniendum est       lit. _it must be come_    _i.e. somebody must
                                                come_
  pugnārī potest      lit. _it can be fought_   _i.e. somebody can
                                                fight_

       *       *       *       *       *

PART III.

       *       *       *       *       *

PARTICLES.

       *       *       *       *       *

139. Particles are the four Parts of Speech that do not admit of
inflection; _viz_. Adverbs, Prepositions, Conjunctions, Interjections.

ADVERBS.

140. Adverbs denote manner, place, time, or degree Most adverbs are in
origin case-forms which have become stereotyped by usage. The common
adverbial terminations have already been given above (§ 76). The following
TABLE OF CORRELATIVES is important:--

  RELATIVE AND            DEMONSTRATIVE.          INDEFINITE.
  INTERROGATIVE.
  ubi, _where; where_?    hīc, _here_.            alicubī, ūsquam,
                          ibi, illīc, istīc,      ūspiam, _somewhere_.
                          _there_.
  quō, _whither;          hūc, _hither_.          aliquō, _to some
  whither_?               eō, istūc, illūc,       place_.
                          _thither_.
  unde, _whence;          hinc, _hence_.          alicunde, _from
  whence_?                inde, istinc, illinc,   somewhere_.
                          _thence_.
  quā, _where; where_?    hāc, _by this way_.     aliquā, _by some way_.
                          eā, istāc, illāc, _by
                          that way_.
  cum, _when_.            nunc, _now_.            aliquandō, umquam,
  quandō, _when_?         tum, tunc, _then_.      _sometime_, _ever_.
  quotiēns, _as often     totiēns, _so often_.    aliquotiēns, _some
  as_; _how often_?                               number of times_.
  quam, _as much as_;     tam, _so much_.         aliquantum,
  _how much_?                                     _somewhat_.

PREPOSITIONS.

141. Prepositions show relations of words. The following Prepositions
govern the Accusative:--

  ad, _to_.               contrā, _against_.      post, _after_.
  adversus,               ergā, _toward_.         praeter, _past_.
  _against_.              extrā, _outside_.       prope, _near_.
  adversum, _toward_,     īnfrā, _below_.         propter, _on account
  _against_.              inter, _between_.       of_.
  ante, _before_.         intrā, _within_.        secundum, _after_.
  apud, _with_,           jūxtā, _near_.          subter, _beneath_.
  _near_.                 ob, _on account         super, _over_.
  circā, _around_.        of_.                    suprā, _above_.
  circiter, _about_.      penes, _in the hands    trāns, _across_.
  circum, _around_.       of_.                    ultrā, _beyond_.
  cis, _this side         per, _through_.         versus, _toward_.
  of_.                    pōne, _behind_.
  citrā, _this side of_.

1. Ūsque is often prefixed to ad, in the sense of _even_; as,--

  ūsque ad urbem, _even to the city_.

2. Versus always follows its case; as,--

  Rōmam versus, _toward Rome_.

It may be combined with a preceding Preposition; as,--

  ad urbem versus, _toward the city_.

3. Like prope, the Comparatives propior, propius, and the Superlatives
proximus, proximē, sometimes govern the Accusative; as,--

  Ubiī proximē Rhēnum incolunt, _the Ubii dwell next to the Rhine_;
  propius castra hostium, _nearer the camp of the enemy_.

142. The following Prepositions govern the Ablative:--

  ā, ab, abs, _from_,     cum, _with_.            prō, _in front of_,
  _by_.                   dē, _from_,             _for_.
  absque, _without_.      _concerning_.           sine, _without_.
  cōram, _in the          ē, ex, _from out        tenus, _up to_.
  presence of_.           of_.
                          prae, _before_.

1. Ā, ab, abs. Before vowels or h, ab must be used; before consonants we
find sometimes ā, sometimes ab (the latter usually not before the labials
b, p, f, v, m; nor before c, g, q, or t); abs occurs only before tē, and ā
is admissible even there.

2. Ē, ex. Before vowels or h, ex must be used; before consonants we find
sometimes ē, sometimes ex.

3. Tenus regularly follows its case, as, pectoribus tenus, _up to the
breast_. It sometimes governs the Genitive, as, labrōrum tenus, _as far as
the lips_.

4. Cum is appended to the Pronouns of the First and Second Persons, and to
the Reflexive Pronoun; usually also to the Relative and Interrogative.
Thus:--

  mēcum         nōbīscum      quōcum _or_ cum quō
  tēcum         vōbīscum      quācum _or_ cum quā
  sēcum                       quibuscum _or_ cum quibus
            On quīcum, see § 89, Footnote 27.

143. Two Prepositions, in, _in_, _into_, and sub, _under_, govern both the
Accusative and the Ablative. With the Accusative they denote motion; with
the Ablative, rest; as,--

  in urbem, _into the city_;
  in urbe, _in the city_.

1. Subter and super are also occasionally construed with the Ablative.

144. RELATION OF ADVERBS AND PREPOSITIONS.

1. Prepositions were originally Adverbs, and many of them still retain
their adverbial meaning; as, post, _afterwards_; ante, _previously_;
contrā, _on the other hand_, etc.

2. Conversely several words, usually adverbs, are occasionally employed as
prepositions; as,--

  clam, prīdiē, with the Accusative.
  procul, simul, palam, with the Ablative.

3. Anástrophe. A Preposition sometimes follows its case. This is called
Anástrophe; as,--

  eī, quōs inter erat, _those among whom he was_.

Anastrophe occurs chiefly with dissyllabic prepositions.

CONJUNCTIONS AND INTERJECTIONS.

145. 1. Conjunctions are used to connect ideas. For Coördinate
Conjunctions, see §§ 341 ff. Subordinate Conjunctions are treated in
connection with Subordinate Clauses.

2. Interjections express emotion. Thus:--

  1. Surprise; as, ēn, ecce, ō.
  2. Joy; as, iō, euoe.
  3. Sorrow and Pain; as, heu, ēheu, vae, prō.
  4. Calling; as, heus, eho.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART IV.

       *       *       *       *       *

WORD-FORMATION.

       *       *       *       *       *

I. DERIVATIVES.

146. Derivatives are formed by appending certain terminations called
Suffixes to stems of verbs, nouns, or adjectives.

A. NOUNS.

1. Nouns derived from Verbs.

147. 1. The suffix -tor (-sor), Fem. -trīx, denotes _the agent_; as,--

  victor, victrīx, _victor_;        dēfēnsor, _defender_.

NOTE.--The suffix -tor is occasionally appended to noun stems; as,--

  gladiātor, _gladiator_ (from gladius).

2. The suffix -or (originally -ōs) denotes _an activity or a condition_;
as,--

  amor, _love_;           timor, _fear_;          dolor, _pain_.

3. The suffixes -tiō (-siō), Gen. -ōnis, and -tus (-sus), Gen. -ūs, denote
_an action as in process_; as,--

  vēnātiō, _hunting_; obsessiō, _blockade_; gemitus, _sighing_; cursus,
  _running_.

NOTE.--Rarer endings with the same force are:--

  a) -tūra, -sūra; as,--

    sepultūra, _burial_; mēnsūra, _measuring_.

  b) -ium; as,--

    gaudium, _rejoicing_.

  c) -īdō; as,--

    cupīdō, _desire_.

4. The suffixes -men, -mentum, -crum, -trum, -bulum, -culum, denote _the
means_ or _place_ of an action; as,--

  lūmen (lūc-s-men), _light_;       vocābulum, _word_;
  ōrnāmentum, _ornament_;           documentum, _proof_;
  sepulcrum, _grave_;               arātrum, _plough_;
                   vehiculum, _carriage_.

2. Nouns derived from Nouns.

148. 1. Diminutives end in--

  -ulus,    (-ula,    -ulum)
  -olus,    (-ola,    -olum), after a vowel
  -culus,   (-cula,   -culum)
  -ellus,   (-ella,   -ellum)
  -illus,   (-illa,   -illum)

as,--

  nīdulus,      _little nest_     (nīdus);
  virgula,      _wand_            (virga);
  oppidulum,    _little town_     (oppidum);
  fīliolus,     _little son_      (fīlius);
  opusculum,    _little work_     (opus);
  tabella,      _tablet_          (tabula);
  lapillus,     _pebble_          (lapis).

NOTE 1.--It will be observed that in gender the Diminutives follow the
gender of the words from which they are derived.

NOTE 2.--The endings -ellus, -illus contain the primitive form of the
diminutive suffix, _viz_., -lo-. Thus:--

  agellus,    _field_,    for ager-lus;
  lapillus,   _pebble_,   for lapid-lus.

2. The suffix -ium appended to nouns denoting persons designates either _a
collection_ of such persons or _their function_; as,--

  collēgium, _a corporation, body of colleagues_ (collēga);
  sacerdōtium, _priestly function_ (sacerdōs).

3. The suffixes -ārium, -ētum, -īle designate a place where objects _are
kept_ or _are found in abundance_; as,--

  columbārium,  _dove-cote_       (columba);
  olīvētum,     _olive-orchard_   (olīva);
  ovīle,        _sheep-fold_      (ovis).

4. The suffix -ātus denotes _official position_ or _honor_; as,--

  cōnsulātus, _consulship_ (cōnsul).

5. The suffix -īna appended to nouns denoting persons designates _a
vocation_ or _the place where it is carried on_; as,--

  doctrīna, _teaching_ (doctor, _teacher_);
  medicīna, _the art of healing_ (medicus, _physician_);
  sūtrīna, _cobbler's shop_ (sūtor, _cobbler_).

6. Patronymics are Greek proper names denoting _son of_ ..., _daughter of_
.... They have the following suffixes:--

  a) Masculines: -idēs, -adēs, -īdēs; as, Priamidēs, _son of Priam_;
  Aeneadēs, _son of Aeneas_; Pēlīdēs, _son of Peleus_.

  b) Feminines: -ēis, -is, -ias; as, Nērēis, _daughter of Nereus_;
  Atlantis, _daughter of Atlas_; Thaumantias, _daughter of Thaumas_.

3. Nouns derived from Adjectives.

149. The suffixes -tās (-itās), -tūdō (-itūdō), -ia, -itia are used for the
formation of abstract nouns _denoting qualities_; as,--

  bonitās, _goodness_; celeritās, _swiftness_; magnitūdō, _greatness_;
  audācia, _boldness_; amīcitia, _friendship_.

       *       *       *       *       *

B. ADJECTIVES.

1. Adjectives derived from Verbs.

150. 1. The suffixes -bundus and -cundus give nearly the force of a present
participle; as,--

  tremebundus, _trembling_;       jūcundus (juvō), _pleasing_.

2. The suffixes -āx and -ulus denote _an inclination_ or _tendency_, mostly
a faulty one; as,--

  loquāx, _loquacious_;           crēdulus, _credulous_.

3. The suffix -idus denotes _a state_; as,--

  calidus, _hot_;         timidus, _timid_;       cupidus, _eager_.

4. The suffixes -ilis and -bilis denote _capacity_ or _ability_, usually in
a passive sense; as,--

  fragilis, _fragile_ (_i.e._ capable of being broken);
  docilis, _docile_.

2. Adjectives derived from Nouns.

a) _From Common Nouns._

151. 1. The suffixes -eus and -inus are appended to names of substances or
materials; as,--

  aureus, _of gold_;      ferreus, _of iron_;     fāginus, _of beech_.

2. The suffixes -ius, -icus, -īlis, -ālis, -āris, -ārius, -nus, -ānus,
-īnus, -īvus, -ēnsis signify _belonging to_, _connected with_; as,--

  ōrātōrius, _oratorical_;        legiōnārius, _legionary_;
  bellicus, _pertaining to war_;  paternus, _paternal_;
  cīvīlis, _civil_;               urbānus, _of the city_;
  rēgālis, _regal_;               marīnus, _marine_;
  cōnsulāris, _consular_;         aestīvus, _pertaining to
                                  summer_;
                  circēnsis, _belonging to the circus_.

3. The suffixes -ōsus and -lentus denote _fullness_; as,--

  perīculōsus, _full of danger_,  glōriōsus, _glorious_;
  _dangerous_;                    opulentus, _wealthy_.

4. The suffix -tus has the force of _provided with_; as,--

  barbātus, _bearded_;            stellātus, _set with stars_.

b) _From Proper Names._

152. 1. Names of _persons_ take the suffixes: -ānus, -iānus, -īnus; as,--

  Catōniānus, _belonging to       Plautīnus, _belonging to
  Cato_;                          Plautus_.

2. Names of _nations_ take the suffixes -icus, -ius; as,--

  Germānicus, _German_;           Thrācius, _Thracian_.

3. Names of _places_ take the suffixes -ānus, -īnus, -ēnsis, -aeus, -ius;
as,--

  Rōmānus, _Roman_;               Athēniēnsis, _Athenian_;
  Amerīnus, _of Ameria_;          Smyrnaeus, _of Smyrna_;
                  Corinthius, _Corinthian_.

NOTE.-- -ānus and -ēnsis, appended to names of countries, designate
something _stationed in_ the country or _connected with_ it, but not
indigenous; as,--

  bellum Āfricānum, _a war (of Romans with Romans) in Africa_.
  bellum Hispāniēnse, _a war carried on in Spain_.
  legiōnes Gallicānae, _(Roman) legions stationed in Gaul_.

3. Adjectives derived from Adjectives.

153. Diminutives in -lus sometimes occur; as,--

  parvolus, _little_;
  misellus (passer), _poor little_ (_sparrow_);
  pauperculus, _needy_.

4. Adjectives derived from Adverbs.

154. These end in -ernus, -ternus, -tīnus, -tĭnus; as,--

  hodiernus,      _of to-day_     (hodiē);
  hesternus,      _of yesterday_  (herī);
  intestīnus,     _internal_      (intus);
  diūtinus,       _long-lasting_  (diū).

       *       *       *       *       *

C. VERBS.

1. Verbs derived from Verbs.

155. 1. INCEPTIVES OR INCHOATIVES. These end in -scō, and are formed from
Present Stems. They denote _the beginning of an action_; as,--

  labāscō,        _begin to totter_   (from labō);
  horrēscō,       _grow rough_        (from horreō);
  tremēscō,       _begin to tremble_  (from tremō);
  obdormīscō,     _fall asleep_       (from dormiō).

2. FREQUENTATIVES OR INTENSIVES. These denote _a repeated or energetic
action_. They are formed from the Participial Stem, and end in -tō or -sō.
Those derived from verbs of the First Conjugation end in -itō (not -ātō, as
we should expect). Examples of Frequentatives are--

  jactō,    _toss about_, _brandish_   (from jaciō,
                                       _hurl_);
  cursō,    _run hither and thither_   (from currō, _run_);
  volitō,   _flit about_               (from volō, _fly_).

  a. Some double Frequentatives occur; as,--

  cantitō,    _sing over and over_  (cantō);
  cursitō,    _keep running about_  (cursō);
  ventitō,    _keep coming_.

  b. agitō, _set in motion_, is formed from the Present Stem.

3. DESIDERATIVES. These denote _a desire to do something_. They are formed
from the Participial Stem, and end in -uriō; as,--

  ēsuriō,       _desire to eat_, _am hungry_         (edō);
  parturiō,     _want to bring forth_, _am in        (pariō).
                labor_

2. Verbs derived from Nouns and Adjectives (Denominatives).

156. Denominatives of the First Conjugation are mostly transitive; those of
the Second exclusively intransitive. Those of the Third and Fourth
Conjugations are partly transitive, partly intransitive. Examples are--

  a) From Nouns:--

  fraudō,   _defraud_     (fraus);
  vestiō,   _clothe_      (vestis);
  flōreō,   _bloom_       (flōs).

  b) From Adjectives:--

  līberō,   _free_        (līber);
  saeviō,   _be fierce_   (saevus).

       *       *       *       *       *

D. ADVERBS.

157. 1. Adverbs derived from verbs are formed from the Participial Stem by
means of the suffix -im; as,--

  certātim,  _emulously_  (certō);
  cursim,   _in haste_    (currō);
  statim,   _immediately_  (stō).

2. Adverbs derived from nouns and adjectives are formed:--

  a) With the suffixes -tim (-sim), -ātim; as,--

    gradātim, _step by step_;

    paulātim, _gradually_;

    virītim, _man by man_.

  b) With the suffix -tus; as,--

    antīquitus, _of old_;

    rādīcitus, _from the roots_.

  c) With the suffix -ter; as,--

    breviter, _briefly_.

       *       *       *       *       *

II. COMPOUNDS.

158. 1. Compounds are formed by the union of simple words. The second
member usually contains the _essential meaning_ of the compound; the first
member expresses _some modification_ of this.

2. Vowel changes often occur in the process of composition. Thus:--

  a. In the second member of compounds. (See § 7, 1.)

  b. The final vowel of the stem of the first member of the compound often
  appears as ĭ where we should expect ŏ or ă; sometimes it is dropped
  altogether, and in case of consonant stems ĭ is often inserted; as,--

    signifer, _standard-bearer_;

    tubicen, _trumpeter_;

    magnanimus, _high-minded_;

    mātricīda, _matricide_.

159. EXAMPLES OF COMPOUNDS.

1. Nouns:--

  a) Preposition + Noun; as,--

    dē-decus, _disgrace_;

    pro-avus, _great-grandfather_.

  b) Noun + Verb Stem; as,--

    agri-cola, _farmer_;

    frātri-cīda, _fratricide_.

2. Adjectives:--

  a) Preposition + Adjective (or Noun); as,--

    per-magnus, _very great_;

    sub-obscūrus, _rather obscure_;

    ā-mēns, _frantic_.

  b) Adjective + Noun; as,--

    magn-animus, _great-hearted_;

    celeri-pēs, _swift-footed_.

  c) Noun + Verb Stem; as,--

    parti-ceps, _sharing_;

    morti-fer, _death-dealing_.

3. Verbs:--

The second member is always a verb. The first may be--

  a) A Noun; as,--

    aedi-ficō, _build_.

  b) An Adjective; as,--

    ampli-ficō, _enlarge_.

  c) An Adverb; as,--

    male-dīcō, _rail at_.

  d) Another Verb; as,--

    cale-faciō, _make warm_.

  e) A Preposition; as,--

    ab-jungō, _detach_;

    re-ferō, _bring back_;

    dis-cernō, _distinguish_;

    ex-spectō, _await_.

NOTE.--Here belong the so-called INSEPARABLE PREPOSITIONS:

    ambi- (amb-), _around_;

    dis- (dir-, di-), _apart_, _asunder_;

    por-, _forward_;

    red- (re-), _back_;

    sēd- (sē-), _apart from_;

    vē-, _without_.

4. Adverbs:--

These are of various types; as,--

    anteā, _before_;

    īlīcō (in locō), _on the spot_;

    imprīmīs, _especially_;

    obviam, _in the way_.

       *       *       *       *       *

PART V.

       *       *       *       *       *

SYNTAX.

       *       *       *       *       *

160. Syntax treats of the use of words in sentences

CHAPTER I.--_Sentences._

CLASSIFICATION OF SENTENCES.

161. Sentences may be classified as follows:--

1. DECLARATIVE, which state something; as,--

    puer scrībit, _the boy is writing_.

2. INTERROGATIVE, Which ask a question; as,--

    quid puer scrībit, _what is the boy writing?_

3. EXCLAMATORY, which are in the form of an exclamation; as,--

    quot librōs scrībit, _how many books he writes!_

4. IMPERATIVE, which express a command or an admonition; as,--

    scrībe, _write!_

FORM OF INTERROGATIVE SENTENCES.

162. Questions may be either Word-Questions or Sentence-Questions.

1. Word-Questions. These are introduced by the various interrogative
pronouns and adverbs, such as--quis, quī, quālis, quantus, quot, quotiēns,
quō, quā, etc. Thus:--

    quis venit, _who comes?_ quam dīū manēbit, _how long will he stay?_

2. Sentence-Questions. These are introduced--

  a) By nōnne implying the answer 'yes'; as,--

    nōnne vidētis, _do you not see?_

  b) By num implying the answer 'no'; as,--

    num exspectās, _do you expect?_ (i.e. _you don't expect, do you?_)

  c) by the enclitic -ne, appended to the emphatic word (which usually
  stands first), and simply asking for information; as,--

    vidēsne, _do you see?_

  A question introduced by -ne may receive a special implication from the
  context; as,--

    sēnsistīne, _did you not perceive?_

  d) Sometimes by no special word, particularly in expressions of
  _surprise_ or _indignation_; as,--

    tū in jūdicum cōnspectum venīre audēs, _do you dare to come into the
    presence of the judges?_

3. Rhetorical Questions. These are questions merely in form, being employed
to express an emphatic assertion; as, quis dubitat, _who doubts?_ (_= no
one doubts_).

4. Double Questions. Double Questions are introduced by the following
particles:--

    utrum ... an;

    -ne ... an;

    ---- ... an.

If the second member is negative, annōn (less often necne) is used.
Examples:--

  utrum honestum est an turpe,    }
  honestumne est an turpe,        } _is it honorable or base?_
  honestum est an turpe,          }
  suntne dī annōn, _are there gods or not?_

  a. An was not originally confined to double questions, but introduced
  single questions, having the force of -ne, nōnne, or num. Traces of this
  use survive in classical Latin; as,--

    Ā rēbus gerendīs abstrahit senectūs. Quibus? An eīs quae juventūte
    geruntur et vīrībus? _Old age (it is alleged) withdraws men from active
    pursuits. From what pursuits? Is it not merely from those which are
    carried on by the strength of youth?_

5. Answers.

  a. The answer YES is expressed by ita, etiam, vērō, sānē, or by
  repetition of the verb; as,--

    'vīsne locum mūtēmus?' 'sānē'. _'Shall we change the place?'_
    _'Certainly.'_

    'estīsne vōs lēgatī?' 'sumus.' _'Are you envoys?'_ _'Yes.'_

  b. The answer NO is expressed by nōn, minimē, minimē vērō, or by
  repeating the verb with a negative; as,--

    'jam ea praeteriit?' 'nōn.' _'Has it passed?'_ _'No.'_

    'estne frāter intus?' 'nōn est.' _'Is your brother within?'_ _'No.'_

SUBJECT AND PREDICATE.

163. The two essential parts of a sentence are the SUBJECT and PREDICATE.

The SUBJECT is that _concerning which something is said, asked, etc._ The
PREDICATE is that _which is said, asked, etc., concerning_ the SUBJECT.

SIMPLE AND COMPOUND SENTENCES.

164. Sentences containing but one Subject and one Predicate are called
SIMPLE SENTENCES, those containing more are called COMPOUND SENTENCES. Thus
puer librōs legit, _the boy reads books_, is a Simple Sentence; but puer
librōs legit et epistulās scrībit, _the boy reads books and writes
letters_, is a Compound Sentence. The different members of a Compound
Sentence are called Clauses.

165. COÖRDINATE AND SUBORDINATE CLAUSES. Clauses which stand upon an
equality are called COÖRDINATE; a Clause dependent on another is called
SUBORDINATE. Thus in puer librōs legit et epistulās scrībit the two clauses
are Coördinate; but in puer librōs legit quōs pater scrībit, _the boy reads
the books which his father writes_, the second clause is Subordinate to the
first.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.--_Syntax of Nouns._

SUBJECT.

166. The Subject of a Finite Verb (i.e. any form of the Indicative,
Subjunctive, or Imperative) is in the Nominative Case.

1. The Subject may be--

  a) A Noun or Pronoun; as,--

    puer scrībit, _the boy writes_;

    hīc scrībit, _this man writes_.

  b) An Infinitive; as,--

    decōrum est prō patriā morī, _to die for one's county is a noble
    thing_.

  c) A Clause; as,--

    opportūnē accīdit quod vīdistī, _it happened opportunely that you saw_.

2. A Personal Pronoun as Subject is usually implied in the Verb and is not
separately expressed; as,--

    scrībō, _I write_; videt, _he sees._

  a. But for the purpose of emphasis or contrast the Pronoun is expressed;
  as,--

    ego scrībō et tū legis, _I write, and you read._

3. The verb is sometimes omitted when it can be easily supplied from the
context, especially the auxiliary sum; as,--

    rēctē ille (_sc_. facit), _he does rightly_; consul profectus (_sc_.
    est), _the consul set out_.

PREDICATE NOUNS.

167. A PREDICATE NOUN is one connected with the Subject by some form of the
verb Sum or a similar verb.

168. A Predicate Noun agrees with its Subject in Case;[47] as,--

    Cicerō ōrātor fuit, _Cicero was an orator_;

    Numa creātus est rēx, _Numa was elected king_.

1. when possible, the Predicate Noun usually agrees with its Subect in
Gender also; as,--

    philosophia est vītae magistra, _philosophy is the guide of life_.

2. Besides sum, the verbs most frequently accompanied by a Predicate Noun
are--

  a) fiō, ēvādō, exsistō; maneō; videor; as,--

    Croesus nōn semper mānsit rēx, _Croesus did not always remain king_.

  b) Passive verbs of _making_, _calling_, _regarding_, etc.; as, creor,
  appellor, habeor; as,--

    Rōmulus rēx appellatus est, _Romulus was called king_;

    habitus est deus, _he was regarded as a god_.

APPOSITIVES.

169. 1. An Appositive is a Noun explaining or defining another Noun
denoting the same person or thing; as,--

    Cicerō cōnsul, _Cicero, the Consul_;

    urbs Rōma, _the city Rome_.

2. An Appositive agrees with its Subject in Case; as,--

    opera Cicerōnīs ōrātōris, _the works of Cicero, the orator_;

    apud Hērodotum, patrem historiae, _in the works of Herodotus, the
    father of history_.

3. When possible, the Appositive agrees with its Subject in Gender also;
as,--

    assentātiō adjūtrīx vitiōrum, _flattery, the promoter of evils_.

4. A Locative may take in Apposition the Ablative of urbs or oppidum, with
or without a preposition; as,--

    Corinthī, Achāiae urbe, or in Achāiae urbe, _at Corinth, a city of
    Greece_.

5. PARTITIVE APPOSITION. A Noun denoting a whole is frequently followed by
an Appositive denoting a part; as,--

    mīlitēs, fortissimus quisque, hostibus restitērunt, _the soldiers, all
    the bravest of them, resisted the enemy_.