The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Esperanto Teacher, by Helen Fryer

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Esperanto Teacher
       A Simple Course for Non-Grammarians

Author: Helen Fryer

Posting Date: September 19, 2014 [EBook #8177]
Release Date: May, 2005
First Posted: June 26, 2003

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ESPERANTO TEACHER ***




Produced by David Starner, Tiffany Vergon, William Patterson
and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team












                                  THE
                           ESPERANTO TEACHER,


                          A SIMPLE COURSE FOR
                            NON-GRAMMARIANS.


                                   BY
                              HELEN FRYER.


                             TENTH EDITION.
                   (B.E.A. PUBLICATIONS FUND--No. 3).


       All profits from the sale of this book are devoted to the
                        propaganda of Esperanto.



                                LONDON:
             BRITISH ESPERANTO ASSOCIATION (Incorporated),
                        17, Hart Street, W.C.I.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                             PRESENTATION.

Perhaps to no one is Esperanto of more service than to the
non-grammarian. It gives him for a minimum expenditure of time and money
a valuable insight into the principles of grammar and the meaning of
words, while enabling him, after only a few months of study, to get into
communication with his fellow men in all parts of the world.

To place these advantages within easy reach of all is the aim of this
little book. Written by an experienced teacher, revised by Mr. E. A.
Millidge, and based on the exercises of Dr. Zamenhof himself, it merits
the fullest confidence of the student, and may be heartily commended to
all into whose hands it may come.

                                                         W. W. PADFIELD.


                                PREFACE.

This little book has been prepared in the hope of helping those who,
having forgotten the lessons in grammar which they received at school,
find some difficulty in learning Esperanto from the existing textbooks.
It is hoped it will be found useful not only for solitary students, but
also for class work.

The exercises are taken chiefly from the "Ekzercaro" of Dr. Zamenhof.
The compiler also acknowledges her indebtedness especially to the
"Standard Course of Esperanto," by Mr. G. W. Bullen, and to the
"Esperanto Grammar and Commentary," by Major-General Geo. Cox, and while
accepting the whole responsibility for all inaccuracies and crudenesses,
she desires to thank all who have helped in the preparation, and
foremost among them Mr. W. W. Padfield, of Ipswich, for advice and
encouragement throughout the work, and to Mr. E. A. Millidge, for his
unfailing kindness and invaluable counsel and help in its preparation
and revision.


                       MANNER OF USING THE BOOK.

The student is strongly advised to cultivate the habit of thinking in
Esperanto from the very beginning of the study. To do this he should
try to realise the idea mentally without putting it into English words,
e.g., when learning the word "rozo" or "kolombo," let him bring the
object itself before his mind's eye, instead of repeating "'rozo',
rose; 'kolombo', pigeon"; or with the sentence "'la suno brilas', the
sun shines," let him picture the sun shining. Having studied the lesson
and learned the vocabulary, he should read the exercise, repeating each
sentence aloud until he has become familiar with it and can pronounce
it freely. Then turning to the English translation at the end of the
book, he should write the exercise into Esperanto, compare it with
the original, and re-learn and re-write if necessary. Although this
method may require a little more time and trouble at first, the greater
facility gained in speaking the language will well repay the outlay.

After mastering this book the student should take some reader, such
as "Unua Legolibro," by Dr. Kabe, and then proceed to the "Fundamenta
Krestomatio," the standard work on Esperanto, by Dr. Zamenhof.

A very good Esperanto-English vocabulary is to be found in the
"Esperanto Key," 1/2d., or in "The Whole of Esperanto for a Penny."


                    THE ORIGIN AND AIM OF ESPERANTO.

A few words as to the origin of Esperanto will perhaps not be out
of place here. The author of the language, Dr. Ludovic Zamenhof, a
Polish Jew, was born on December 3rd, 1859, at Bielovstok, in Poland,
a town whose inhabitants are of four distinct races, Poles, Russians,
Germans, and Jews, each with their own language and customs, and
often at open enmity with each other. Taught at home that all men are
brethren, Zamenhof found everywhere around him outside the denial of
this teaching, and even as a child came to the conclusion that the races
hated, because they could not understand, each other. Feeling keenly,
too, the disabilities under which his people specially laboured, being
cut off by their language from the people among whom they lived, while
too proud to learn the language of their persecutors, he set himself to
invent a language which should be neutral and therefore not require any
sacrifice of pride on the part of any race.

Interesting as is the story of Zamenhof's attempts and difficulties, it
must suffice here to say that at the end of 1878 the new language was
sufficiently advanced for him to impart it to schoolfellows like-minded
with himself, and on December 17th of that year they feted its birth,
and sang a hymn in the new language, celebrating the reign of unity and
peace which should be brought about by its means, "All mankind must
be united in one family." But the enthusiasm of its first followers
died down under the derision they encountered, and for nine years more
Zamenhof worked in secret at his language, translating, composing,
writing original articles, improving, polishing, till in 1887 he
published his first book under the title of "An International Language
by Dr. Esperanto." ("Esperanto" means "one who hopes").

That the idea which impelled the young Zamenhof to undertake such a work
is still the mainspring of his devotion to the cause is shown by the
following extract from his opening speech at the second International
Esperanto Congress in 1906:--"We are all conscious that it is not
the thought of its practical utility which inspires us to work for
Esperanto, but only the thought of the important and holy idea which
underlies an international language. This idea, you all know, is that
of: brotherhood and justice among all peoples." And, again, in his
presidential address at the third Esperanto Congress, held this year
(1907) at Cambridge, he said, "We are constantly repeating that we do
not wish to interfere in the internal life of the nations, but only to
build a bridge between the peoples. The ideal aim of Esperantists, never
until now exactly formulated, but always clearly felt, is: To establish
a neutral foundation, on which the various races of mankind may hold
peaceful, brotherly intercourse, without intruding on each other their
racial differences."

   Sur neuxtrala lingva fundamento,
   Komprenante unu la alian,
   La popoloj faros en konsento
   Unu grandan rondon familian.

   (On the foundation of a neutral language,
   Understanding one another,
   The peoples will form in agreement
   One great family circle).

                                                            HELEN FRYER.

December, 1907.


                             THE ALPHABET.


                         SOUNDS OF THE LETTERS.

In Esperanto each letter has only one sound, and each sound is
represented in only one way. The words are pronounced exactly as spelt,
every letter being sounded.

Those CONSONANTS which in English have one simple sound only are exactly
the same in Esperanto; they are--b, d, f, k, l, m, n, p, r, t, v, z (r
must be well rolled).

q, w, x, y are not used.

c, g, h, s, which in English represent more than one sound, and j are
also used with the mark ^--

                 c cx,   g gx,   h hx,   j jx,   s sx.

c - (whose two English sounds are represented by k and s) has the sound
of TS, as in iTS, TSar.

cx - like CH, TCH, in CHurCH, maTCH.

g - hard, as in Go, GiG, Gun.

gx - soft, as in Gentle, Gem, or like J in Just, Jew.

h - well breathed, as in Horse, Home, How.

hx - strongly breathed, and in the throat, as in the Scotch word loCH.
(Ask any Scotsman to pronounce it). Hx occurs but seldom. It is the
Irish GH in louGH, and the Welsh CH.

j - like Y in Yes, You, or J in halleluJah, fJord.

jx - like S in pleaSure, or the French J, as in deJeuner, Jean d'Arc.

s - like SS in aSS, leSS, never like S in roSe.

sx - like SH in SHe, SHall, SHip, or S in Sugar, Sure.

In newspapers, etc., which have not the proper type, cx, gx, hx, jx, sx
are often replaced by ch, gh, hh, jh, sh, or by c', g', h', j', s', and
ux by u.

ux - is also a consonant, and has the sound of W in We, as EUXropo, or U
in persUade.

The VOWELS a, e, i, o, u have not the English, but the Continental
sounds.

a - always like A in Ah! or in tArt.

e - like E in bEnd, but broader, like E in thEre.

i - is a sound between EE in mEEt and I in Is.

o - like O in fOr, or in the Scottish NO, or AU in AUght.

u - like OO in bOOt, pOOr.

a, e, i, o, u are all simple sounds, that is, the mouth is kept in one
position while they are being sounded. In learning them lengthen them
out, and be careful not to alter the position of the mouth, however long
they are drawn out. In the compound sounds given below the shape of the
mouth changes; to get the correct pronunciation sound each letter fully
and distinctly, gradually bringing them closer until they run together,
when they become almost as follows:--

aj - nearly like AI in AIsle, or I in nIce, fIne.

ej - nearly like EI in vEIn.

oj - nearly like OY in bOY, or OI in vOId.

uj - nearly like UJ in hallelUJah.

aux - like AHW, or nearly OU in hOUse, pronounced broadly, haOUse.

eux - like EHW, or EY W in thEY Were, AYW in wAYWard.

Practise saying aja, eja, oja, uja, auxa, euxa several times quickly.
Then gradually drop the final a.


                                ACCENT.

The accent or stress is always placed on the syllable before the last,
as es-PE-ro, es-pe-RAN-to, es-pe-ran-TIS-to, es-pe-ran-tis-TI-no; JU-na,
ju-NU-lo, ju-nu-LA-ro. All the syllables must be clearly pronounced, not
slurred over.


                      EXERCISE IN PRONOUNCIATION.

a - (as in bAth), PAT-ra, LA-na, a-GRA-bla, mal-VAR-ma, KLA-ra,
pa-FA-do.

e - (as in bEnd), BE-la, mEm, fe-NES-tro, ven-DRE-do, tre-E-ge,
le-TE-ro.

i - (as in sEE), mi, I-li, i-MI-ti, vi-ZI-ti, TRIN-ki, in-SIS-ti.

o - (as in fOr), HO-mo, RO-zo, ko-LOM-bo, DOR-mo (the R rolled), MOR-to,
po-PO-lo.

u - (as in bOOt), U-nu, dum, BRU-lu, sur-TU-to, vul-TU-ro, mur-MUR-i.

aj - (as in nIce), ajn, kaj, rAJ-to, taj-LO-ro, FAJ-ro, BE-laj.

ej - (as in plAY), VEJ-no, HEJ-mo, plej, HEJ-to.

oj - (as in bOY), PAT-roj, FOJ-no, HO-mojn, KOJ-no, SOJ-lo, KON-koj.

uj - (as in hallelUJah), tuj, CXI-uj, TI-uj.

aux - (as in cOW), AN-taux, LAUX-bo, fraux-LI-no, KAUX-zi, auxs- KUL-tu,
AUX-di.

eux - (like ehw), Eux-RO-po, neux-ral-GI-o, Eux-kar-IS-to,
reux-ma-TIS-mo.

c - (= ts, biTS), CE-lo, fa-CI-la (=FA-TSEE-LA), be-LE-co (BE-LE-TSO),
ofi-CI-ro, PA-co, ci-ko-NI-o, CO-lo.

cx - (= tch, maTCH), cxu, ecx, cxe, CXAM-bro, CXER-pi, TRAN-cxi, RI-cxa.

g - (as in Good), LON-ga, LE-gi, ge-NU-o, GEN-to, GLI-ti, GRO-so.

gx - (as in Gem), GXE-mi, gxis, gxar-DE-no, SA-gxa, MAN-gxi, RE-gxo.

h - (breathed), HA-ro, hi-RUN-do, ha-RIN-go, his-to-RI-o, he-DE-ro,
HIM-no.

hx - (in throat), hxe-MI-o, hxo-LE-ro, me-hxa-NI-ko, E-hxo, hxa-O-so.

j - (like y), JU-na, ma-JES-ta, sin-JO-ro, ka-JE-ro, jes, ja.

jx - (= zh), bon-AJX-o, JXE-ti, jxur-NA-lo, jxus, JXAUX-do, jxa-LU-zo.

s - (ss), SU-per, ses, STA-ri, trans, ves-PE-ro, SVIN-gi.

sx - (sh), FRE-sxa, SXE-lo, KU-sxi, SXTU-po, SXVI-ti, SXVE-li.

kz - ek-ZER-co, ek-ZEM-plo, ek-za-ME-no, ek-ze-KU-ti, ek-ZI-li,
ek-ZIS-ti.

kv - kvar, kvin, kvi-E-ta, KVAN-kam, KVER-ko, KVA-zaux.

gv - GVI-di, LIN-gvo.

kn - KNA-bo, KNE-di.

sc - (sts), SCI-o (sts-ee-o), SCE-no (stse-no), SCEP-tro, eks-CI-ti
(eks-TSEE-tee), eks-cel-EN-co (eks-tsel-EN-tso), sci-EN-co
(stsee-en-tso).

CEN-to, SEN-to; CE-lo, SE-lo, SXE-lo; CO-lo, KO-lo; ci, cxi; ec, ecx;
KRU-co, KRU-cxo; PA-go, PA-gxo; RE-gi, RE-gxi; SE-gi, SE-gxo; HO-ro,
HXO-ro; PE-si, PE-zi; STE-lo, SXTE-lo; SAN-go, SXAN-go; VER-so, VER-sxi;
dis-I-ri, dis-SXI-ri; GUS-ta, GXUS-ta; STU-po, SXTU-po; STA-lo, SXTA-lo;
POS-to, POSX-to; re-SER-vi, re-ZER-vi; ru-GXI-gi, ru-CXI-gxi; ri-CXI-gi,
ri-CXI-gxi, ri-CXE-co; FTI-zo.

a-E-ro, oce-A-no, fe-I-no, GXU-i, pe-RE-i, pe-RE-u; fo-I-ro,
CXI-u-JA-ra, VO-joj, tro-U-zi, for-RAM-pi, ku-I-ri; SKVA-mo,
zo-o-lo-GI-o, en-U-i, de-TRU-u, SXPRU-ci, ru-I-ni; Jan-u-A-ro,
Feb-ru-A-ro, li-E-no, ho-DI-aux, hi-E-raux, Hun-gar-U-jo, Ne-a-PO-lo,
sci-U-ro.


                   *       *       *       *       *


NOTE.--A useful mnemonic for the Esperanto vowels is pAr, pEAr, pIEr,
pORe, pOOr, but the sounds should not be dragged. It is helpful to note
that the English words "mate, reign, pane, bend; meet, beat, feel, lady;
grow, loan, soft; mute, yes, mule" (as pronounced in London and South of
England), would be written in Esperanto thus:--"mejt, rejn, pejn, bend;
mijt, bijt, fijl, lejdi; groux, louxn, soft; mjut, jes, mjul".


                               LESSON 1.

                                 WORDS.

In Esperanto a word generally consists of an unchanging part or root,
which expresses the idea, and an ending which shows the use of the word,
that is, whether it is a name, a describing word, etc. By changing the
ending the use of the word is changed.

Notice carefully the words given below which end in "o". It will be seen
that they are all names.

In Esperanto every name ends in "o".

(In Grammar names are called NOUNS).

Notice further the words which end in "-as." They all express doing or
being (action or state), which is going on at the present time, or which
is a custom at the present time.

The words "a," "an," are not expressed; "the" is translated by "la".

                              VOCABULARY.

   pAtro : father.                    cxAmbro : room.
   frAto : brother.                   fenEstro : window.
   fIlo : son.                        lIbro : book.
   TeodOro :Theodore.                 krajOno : pencil.
   tajlOro : tailor.                  plUmo : pen.
   leOno : lion.                      cxapElo : hat.
   bEsto : animal.                    dOmo : house.
   kolOmbo : pigeon.                  Arbo : tree.
   bIrdo : bird.
   rOzo : rose.                       Estas : is, are, am.
   flOro : flower.                    apartEnas : belongs.
   pOmo : apple.                      brIlas : shines.
   sUno : sun.                        kUsxas : lies.
   tEro : earth, ground.              stAras : stands.
   sxtOno : stone.

   la : the.                          de : of, from.
   kaj : and.                         kIe : where.
   jes : yes.                         kIo : what thing.
   ne : no, not.                      jen Estas : here is.
   al : to, towards.                  cxu : whether (asks a question).
   sur : on.                          Antaux : before, in front of.
   en : in.
   Apud : by, near, beside.

             (The [UPPERCASE] shows the accented syllable).

Patro kaj frato. Leono estas besto. Rozo estas floro kaj kolombo estas
birdo. La rozo apartenas al Teodoro. La suno brilas. La patro estas
tajloro. Kie estas la libro kaj la krajono? Jen estas pomo. Sur la tero
kusxas sxtono. Sur la fenestro kusxas krajono kaj plumo. La filo staras
apud la patro. Jen kusxas la cxapelo de la patro. La patro estas en la
cxambro. Antaux la domo staras arbo.

Kio estas leono? Kio estas rozo? Kio brilas? Kio estas la patro? Kie
estas la patro? Kio estas sur la fenestro? Kie estas la plumo?

Cxu leono estas besto? Jes, leono estas besto. Cxu rozo estas birdo? Ne,
rozo ne estas birdo, rozo estas floro.


                               LESSON 2.

Every "describing" word, that is, every word which tells the kind or
quality of a person or thing, ends in "a," as "granda", large; "rugxa",
red.

(A describing word is called an ADJECTIVE).

                              VOCABULARY.

   bEla : beautiful.                  jUna : young.
   blAnka : white.                    matUra : mature, ripe.
   blUa : blue.                       nOva : new.
   bOna : good.                       nUtra : nutritious.
   fidEla : faithful.                 pUra : pure, clean.
   fOrta : strong.                    rIcxa : rich.
   frEsxa : fresh.                    sAna : well (healthy).

   cxiElo : sky, heaven.              nEgxo : snow.
   fEsto : holiday.                   pAno : bread.
   frauxlIno : maiden lady, Miss      papEro : paper.
   hOmo : man (human being).          tAblo : table.
   hUndo : dog.                       vIno : wine.
   infAno : child.                    Onklo : uncle.
   JohAno : John.                     pli : more.
   kajEro : exercise book.            ol : than.
   lAkto : milk.                      sed : but.
   mAno : hand.                       tre : very.

La patro estas sana. Infano ne estas matura homo. La cxielo estas blua.
Leono estas forta. La patro estas bona. La mano de Johano estas pura.
Papero estas blanka. Blanka papero kusxas sur la tablo. Jen estas la
kajero de la juna frauxlino. Sur la cxielo staras la bela suno. La
papero estas tre blanka, sed la negxo estas pli blanka. Lakto estas pli
nutra, ol vino. La pano estas fresxa. La onklo estas pli ricxa, ol la
frato. Jen kusxas rugxa rozo. La hundo estas tre fidela. La libro estas
nova.


                               LESSON 3.

When the name (noun) is required to denote more than one of the persons
or things for which it stands, "j" is added to it, as "rozoj", roses;
"kolomboj", pigeons; and then every "describing" word (adjective) which
belongs to it must also have "j", as "rugxaj rozoj", red roses; "la
kolomboj estas belaj", the pigeons are beautiful.

(When the noun stands for "more than one," it is said to be PLURAL. "j"
is the sign of the plural).

                              VOCABULARY.

   jAro : year.                       agrAbla : agreeable, pleasant.
   kAnto : song.                      Akra : sharp.
   knAbo : boy.                       delikAta : delicate.
   lilIo : lily.                      flUgas : fly, flies.
   trancxIlo : knife.                 diligenta : diligent.
   dento : tooth.

   lUndo : Monday.                    vendrEdo : Friday.
   mArdo : Tuesday.                   sabAto : Saturday.
   merkrEdo : Wednesday.              dimAncxo : Sunday.
   jxAUXdo : Thursday.

La birdoj flugas. La kanto de la birdoj estas agrabla. Kie estas la
knaboj? La patroj estas sanaj. Infanoj ne estas maturaj homoj. Leonoj
estas fortaj. La manoj de Johano estas puraj. Jen estas la kajeroj de la
junaj frauxlinoj. La onkloj estas pli ricxaj, ol la fratoj. La hundoj
estas tre fidelaj. Blankaj paperoj kusxas sur la tablo. En la cxambro
estas novaj cxapeloj. Kie estas la akraj trancxiloj? Bonaj infanoj estas
diligentaj. Jen kusxas puraj, blankaj, delikataj lilioj. La dentoj de
leonoj estas akraj.


                               LESSON 4.

                     mi : I.           ni : we,
                     ci : thou.        vi : you.
                     li : he.          ili : they.
                     sxi : she.        si (see Lesson 7).
                     gxi : it          oni : one, they, people.


(The above words are called PRONOUNS because they are used instead of
repeating the noun).

By adding "a" the pronouns are made to denote a quality, in this case
possession, as "mia libro", my book; "via pomo", your apple; "ilia
infano", their child.

                  mia : my, mine.      nia : our, ours.
                  cia : thy, thine.    via : your, yours,
                  lia : his.           ilia : their, theirs.
                  sxia : her, hers.    sia (see Lesson 7),
                  gxia : its.

When the name to which these "pronoun-adjectives" belong is plural they
must of course take "j", as "miaj libroj", my books; "viaj pomoj", your
apples; "iliaj infanoj", their children.

In speaking of relations and parts of the body "la" is often used
instead of "mia", "lia", etc., as "La filo staras apud la patro", The
son stands by the (his) father.

For "mine," "ours," etc., "mia", "nia", etc., may be used either with or
without "la", as "La libro estas mia", or "La libro estas la mia", The
book is mine.

"Oni" is used for "one, they, people", when these words are indefinite
in meaning, as in the sentences:--Here one can speak fearlessly, "Tie
cxi oni povas maltime paroli", They say that he is rich, "Oni diras, ke
li estas ricxa", People often eat too quickly, "Oni ofte mangxas tro
rapide."

                              VOCABULARY.

   Avo : grandfather.                 vEnkas : conquers.
   amIko : friend.                    mAngxi : to eat.
   gxardEno : garden                  gxentIla : polite.
   knabIno : girl.                    silEnte : silently.
   rUso : Russian.                    kIu : who, which (that).
   sinjOro  gentleman, Mr., Sir.      cxIu : each one, every.
   vEro : truth.                      cxIuj : all, all the.
   vEnas : comes.                     la plej : the most.
   Iras : goes.                       tIel : as, so.
   lEgas : reads.                     kIel : as.
   skrIbas : writes.                  nun : now.
   plOras : cry, cries.               Ankaux : also.
   vOlas : wills, wishes.             cxIam : always.
   dIras : says.                      el : out of.
   sIdas : sits.                      cxar : because, for.

Mi legas. Vi skribas. Li estas knabo, kaj sxi estas knabino. Ni estas
homoj. Vi estas infanoj. Ili estas rusoj. Kie estas la knaboj? Ili estas
en la gxardeno, Kie estas la knabinoj? Ili ankaux estas en la gxardeno.
Kie estas la trancxiloj? Ili kusxas sur la tablo. La infano ploras, cxar
gxi volas mangxi. Sinjoro, vi estas negxentila. Sinjoroj, vi estas
negxentilaj. Oni diras; ke la vero cxiam venkas. La domo apartenas al
li. Mi venas de la avo, kaj mi iras nun al la onklo. Mi estas tiel
forta, kiel vi. Nun mi legas, vi legas, kaj li legas, ni cxiuj legas. Vi
skribas, kaj la infanoj skribas, ili (vi) cxiuj sidas silente kaj
skribas.

Mia hundo, vi estas tre fidela. Li estas mia onklo, cxar mia patro estas
lia frato. El cxiuj miaj infanoj, Ernesto estas la plej juna. Lia patro
kaj liaj fratoj estas en la gxardeno. sxia onklo estas en la domo. Kie
estas viaj libroj? Niaj libroj kusxas sur la tablo; iliaj krajonoj kaj
ilia papero ankaux kusxas sur la tablo.

Kiu estas en la cxambro? Kiuj estas en la cxambro? La sinjoro, kiu
legas, estas mia amiko. La sinjoro, al kiu vi skribas, estas tajloro.
Kio kusxas sur la tablo?


                               LESSON 5.

                         The use of final "n".

In order to understand the meaning of a sentence it is necessary to be
able to recognise clearly and unmistakably what it is that is spoken
about, that is, what the "subject of the sentence" is. In English this
is often to be recognised only by its position in the sentence. For
instance, the three words--visited, John, George, can be arranged to
mean two entirely, different things, either "John visited George," or
"George visited John." [Footnote: In teaching Esperanto to children it
is well to make sure before going further that they thoroughly
understand, what the subject is. The subject is that which we think or
speak about. The word which stands for it is the subject of the
sentence. The children may be required to underline the subject of each
sentence in a suitable piece of prose or verse.] In Esperanto the sense
does not depend on the arrangement-- "Johano vizitis Georgon" and
"Georgon vizitis Johano" mean exactly the same thing, that John visited
George, the "n" at the end of "Georgon" showing that "Georgon" is not
the subject. There is no want of clearness about the following
(Esperanto) sentences, absurd as they are in English:--

               La   patron  mordis  la   hundo.
               The  father   bit    the   dog.

               La  infanon   gratis    la   kato.
               The  child   scratched  the  cat.

               La  birdojn  pafis  Johano.
               The  birds   shot    John.

               La   musojn  kaptis  la  knabo.
               The   mice   caught  the  boy.

               La   kokidon  mangxis  la   onklo.
               The  chicken    ate    the  uncle.

               La   bildon   pentris  la  pentristo.
               The  picture  painted  the  painter.

               La   fisxojn  vendis  la   fisxisto.
               The   fish     sold   the  fisherman.

In these sentences the subjects are at once seen to be "hundo, kato,
Johano, knabo, onklo, pentristo, fisxisto", for the final "n" in
"patron, infanon, birdojn, musojn, kokidon, bildon, fisxojn",
distinguishes these words from the subject.

This use of "n" renders clear sentences that are not clear in English.
"John loves Mary more than George" may mean "more than John loves
George" or "more than George loves Mary." In Esperanto it is quite
clear. "Johano amas Marion, pli ol Georgo" means "more than George loves
Mary," because "Georgo" is the subject of the second (elliptical)
sentence, but "Johano amas Marion, pli ol Georgon" means "more than
John loves George," because the final "n" in Georgon shows this to be
not the subject.

There are cases, however, in which it is not necessary to add "n", the
noun or pronoun being distinguished from the subject in another way.
Examples are found in the first exercise:--"Sur la tero" kusxas sxtono,
"On the ground" lies a stone. "Antaux la pordo" staras arbo, "Before the
door" stands a tree. Notwithstanding their position, "ground" and "door"
are seen to be not the subject, because before them are the words "on,"
"before," which connect them with the rest of the sentence--it is "on
the ground," "before the door." So with other sentences.

The words "on", "before", and others given [in Lesson 26] are called
PREPOSITIONS ("pre" = before). The noun or pronoun which follows them
can never be the subject of the sentence.

Remember, then, that

"N" is added to every noun and pronoun, "other than the subject", unless
it has a preposition before it. [Footnote: (i.). The explanation usually
given for the use of final "n" is, that "n" is added to nouns and
pronouns (a) in the Accusative Case (the direct object), (b) when the
preposition is omitted. The explanation given above seems to me,
however, to be much simpler. (ii.). Another use of final "n" is given
later [Lesson 12, Lesson 26] ]

When the noun takes "n", any adjective which belongs to it must also
take "n", as, "Li donas al mi belan rugxan floron", He gives me a
beautiful red flower. "Li donas al mi belajn rugxajn florojn", He gives
me beautiful red flowers.

                              VOCABULARY.

   letero : letter.                   mateno : morning.
   litero : letter of alphabet.       multaj : many.
   festo : festival, holiday.         obstina : obstinate.
   tago : day.                        gxoja : joyful, joyous.
   nokto : night.                     hela : bright, clear.

   amas : loves.                      pala : pale.
   vidas : sees.                      deziras : desires, wishes.
   konas : knows.                     eraras : errs, is wrong.
   havas : has, possesses.            vokas : calls.
   luno : moon.                       hejtas : heats.
   stelo : star.                      hodiaux : to:day.
   vintro : winter.                   malpli : less.
   forno : stove.                     kiam : when.
   edzino : wife.                     kia : what (kind).

Mi vidas leonon (leonojn). Mi legas libron (librojn). Mi amas la patron.
Mi konas Johanon. La patro ne legas libron, sed li skribas leteron. Mi
ne amas obstinajn homojn. Mi deziras al vi bonan tagon, sinjoro. Bonan
matenon! Gxojan feston (mi deziras al vi). Kia gxoja festo (estas
hodiaux)! En la tago ni vidas la helan sunon, kaj en la nokto ni vidas
la palan lunon kaj la belajn stelojn. Ni havas pli fresxan panon, ol vi.
Ne, vi eraras, sinjoro, via pano estas malpli fresxa, ol mia. Ni vokas
la knabon, kaj li venos. En la vintro oni hejtas la fornojn. Kiam oni
estas ricxa, oni havas multajn amikojn. Li amas min, sed mi lin ne amas.
Sinjoro P. kaj lia edzino tre amas miajn infanojn; mi ankaux tre amas
iliajn (infanojn). Mi ne konas la sinjoron, kiu legas.


                               LESSON 6.

We have seen already (Lesson 1) that the words which end in "-as"
express the idea of "doing" (action) or of "being" (state), and that
they assert that this action or state is going on, or is a custom, at
the present time, as "Mi vidas", I see; "Sxi estas", She is; "Ili
suferas", They suffer, they are suffering.

To say that the action or state took place at some "past" time, "-is" is
used, as "Mi vidis", I saw; "Sxi estis", She was; "Ili suferis", They
suffered, they were suffering.

To say that the action or state will take place at some time to come, in
the future, "-os" is used, as, "Mi vidos", I shall see; "Sxi estos", She
will be; "Ili suferos", They will suffer, they will be suffering.

(Words which assert something, or which express the idea of doing or of
being, are called VERBS).

(The root only of the verbs will now be given in the Vocabulary without
the termination).

                              VOCABULARY.

   historio : history.                dorm- : sleep.
   kuzo : cousin.                     vek- : wake.
   plezuro : pleasure.                sercx- : seek.
   horlogxo : clock.                  fin- : end.
   laboro : work.                     tim- : fear.
   popolo : a people.                 ating- : reach to.
   virino : woman.                    surda : deaf.
   agxo : age.                        muta : dumb.
   jaro : year.                       dolcxa : sweet.
   permeso : permission.              tri : three.
   respond- : answer.                 dek-kvin : fifteen.
   far- : do, make.                   kial : why.
   forpel- : drive away.              hieraux : yesterday.
   ricev- : receive, get.             morgaux : to-morrow.
   don- : give.                       antaux : before.
   trov- : find.                      post : after.
   renkont- : meet.                   jam : already.
   salut- : greet, salute.            jam ne : no more.
   rakont- : relate, tell.            ankoraux : still, yet.
   vizit- : visit.

Kial vi ne respondas al mi? Cxu vi estas surda aux muta? Kion vi faras?


La knabo forpelis la birdojn. De la patro mi ricevis libron, kaj de la
frato mi ricevis plumon. La patro donis al mi dolcxan pomon. Jen estas
la pomo, kiun mi trovis. Hieraux mi renkontis vian filon, kaj li
gxentile salutis min. Antaux tri tagoj mi vizitis vian kuzon, kaj mia
vizito faris al li plezuron. Kiam mi venis al li, li dormis, sed mi lin
vekis.

Mi rakontos al vi historion. Cxu vi diros al mi la veron? Hodiaux estas
sabato, kaj morgaux estos dimancxo. Hieraux estis vendredo, kaj
postmorgaux estos lundo. Cxu vi jam trovis vian horlogxon? Mi gxin
ankoraux ne sercxis; kiam mi finos mian laboron, mi sercxos mian
horlogxon, sed mi timas, ke mi gxin jam ne trovos. Se vi nin venkos, la
popolo diros, ke nur virinojn vi venkis. Kiam vi atingos la agxon de
dek-kvin jaroj, vi ricevos la permeson.


                               LESSON 7.

Confusion is apt to occur in English in the use of the words "him, her,
it, them; his, hers, its, their", e.g., "John loves his brother and his
children." Whose children, John's or his brother's? "The boys brought to
their fathers their hats." Whose hats, the boys' or their fathers'? "She
gave her sister her book." Whose book? Her own or her sister's?

This confusion is avoided in Esperanto by the use of, the pronoun "si"
("sin"), meaning "himself, herself, itself, themselves", and "sia,"
meaning "his own, her own, its own, their own."

"Si" ("sin, sia") refers to the "subject" of the sentence in which it
occurs; therefore in the sentence "John loves his brother and his son,"
it must be "Johano amas sian fraton kaj sian filon" if it is his own
(John's) son, because John is the subject, but we must say "lian filon"
if the brother's son is meant. "La knaboj alportis al siaj patroj siajn
cxapelojn" means "The boys brought to their fathers their own (the
boys') hats," because "boys" is the subject, but if we mean "the
fathers' hats" it must be "iliajn cxapelojn."

"She gave to her sister her book" must be "Sxi donis al sia fratino sian
libron" if it were her own book, but "Sxi donis al sia fratino sxian
libron" if it were her sister's book. "Li diris al si"... means "He
said to himself," but "Li diris al li" means that he said it to another
person.

"Si", "sia", can only "refer to" the subject, it cannot be the subject
itself or any part of it; therefore we must say "Sinjoro P. kaj lia
edzino tre amas miajn infanojn", because the subject is "Sinjoro P. kaj
lia edzino."

"Mem," self, is only used for emphasis, "e.g.", "Mi mem," my (own) self.

                              VOCABULARY.

   gasto : guest.                     montr- : show.
   vespero : evening.                 fleg- : tend, take care of
   mangxo : meal.                     re-ven- : come back.
   pupo : doll.                       pri : concerning, about.
   aventuro : adventure.              gxis : until, as far as.
   palaco : palace.                   tute : quite, wholly.
   zorg- : take care of.              tute ne : not at all.
   gard- : guard.                     kun : with.
   am- : love.                        el : out of.
   akompan- : accompany.              el-ir- : go out of.
   lav- : wash.

Mi amas min mem, vi amas vin mem, li amas sin mem kaj cxiu homo amas sin
mem. Mi zorgas pri sxi tiel, kiel mi zorgas pri mi mem, sed sxi mem tute
ne zorgas pri si, kaj tute sin ne gardas. Miaj fratoj havis hodiaux
gastojn; post la vespermangxo niaj fratoj eliris kun la gastoj el sia
domo kaj akompanis ilin gxis ilia domo. Mi lavis min en mia cxambro, kaj
sxi lavis sin en sia cxambro. La infano sercxis sian pupon; mi montris
al la infano, kie kusxas gxia pupo. [Footnote: Notice the use of the
present "kusxas," "lies", after the past "montris," "showed", because at
the time the action of "showing" took place the action of "lying" was
then actually going on.]

Sxi rakontis al li sian aventuron. Sxi revenis al la palaco de sia
patro. Siajn florojn sxi ne flegis. Mia frato diris al Stefano, ke li
amas lin pli, ol sin mem.


                               LESSON 8.

The Cardinal Numbers are:--

   unu : 1          kvar : 4          sep :  7          dek : 10
   du :  2          kvin : 5          ok :   8          cent : 100
   tri : 3          ses :  6          naux : 9          mil : 1,000

The numbers above 10 are written and read exactly as they are set down
in figures:--11, dek unu; 12, dek du; 13, dek tri; 19, dek naux. The
"tens" are written as one word, 20, dudek; 30, tridek; 90, nauxdek; 23,
dudek tri; 47, kvardek sep; 85, okdek kvin; 136, cent tridek ses; 208,
ducent (as one word) ok; 359, tricent kvindek naux; 1,001, mil unu;
2,877, dumil okcent sepdek sep; 1907, mil nauxcent sep.

Notice that there is a separate word for each figure except 0, nulo.

                              VOCABULARY.

   busxo : mouth.                     forges- : forget.
   orelo : ear.                       kre- : create.
   fingro : finger.                   estu : should be.
   horo : hour.                       facile : easily.
   minuto : minute.                   sankta : holy.
   sekundo : second.                  unuj : some.
   monato : month.                    alia : other.
   semajno : week.                    cxio : everything, all.
   dato : date (of month, etc.).      multe : much, many.
   pov- : can, be able.               per : by means of, through, with.
   promen- : take a walk.             nur : only.
   konsist- : consist.                malbona : bad.
   elekt- : choose, elect.            Kristnaska Tago : Christmas Day.

   Januaro : January.                 Julio : July.
   Februaro : February.               Auxgusto : August.
   Marto : March.                     Septembro : September.
   Aprilo : April.                    Oktobro : October.
   Majo : May.                        Novembro : November.
   Junio : June.                      Decembro : December.

Du homoj povas pli multe fari, ol unu. Mi havas nur unu busxon, sed mi
havas du orelojn. Li promenas kun tri hundoj. Li faris cxion per la dek
fingroj de siaj manoj. El sxiaj multaj infanoj unuj estas bonaj kaj
aliaj malbonaj. Kvin kaj sep faras dek du. Dek kaj dek faras dudek. Kvar
kaj dek ok faras dudek du. Tridek kaj kvardek kvin faras sepdek kvin.
Mil okcent nauxdek tri. Li havas dek unu infanojn. Sesdek minutoj faras
unu horon, kaj unu minuto konsistas el sesdek sekundoj.

                                  8A.

The Ordinal Numbers, first, second, etc., are formed by adding "a" to
the Cardinal Numbers, as "unua", first; "dua", second; "tria", third;
"kvara", fourth; "deka", tenth; "centa", hundredth; "mila", thousandth.
The compound numbers are joined together by hyphens, and "a" is added
to the last, as "dek-unua", eleventh; "la tridek-nauxa pagxo", the
thirty-ninth page; la "cent-kvardek-kvina psalmo", the 145th psalm.
Being adjectives, the Ordinal Numbers take the plural "j" and accusative
"n" when necessary.

The Ordinals are used to tell the hour, as "Estas la trio, horo", It is
3 o'clock. The Cardinal Numbers are used for the minutes, as "A quarter
past three" is "La tria horo kaj dek-kvin"; "Ten minutes to five," "La
kvara horo kaj kvindek".

Januaro estas la unua monato de la jaro, Aprilo estas la kvara, Novembro
estas la dek-unua, kaj Decembro estas la dek-dua. La dudeka (tago) de
Februaro estas la kvindek-unua tago de la jaro. La sepan tagon de la
semajno Dio elektis, ke gxi estu pli sankta, ol la ses unuaj tagoj. Kion
Dio kreis en la sesa tago? Kiun daton ni havas hodiaux? Hodiaux estas la
dudek-sepa (tago) de Marto. Kristnaska Tago estas la dudek-kvina (tago)
de Decembro, Novjara Tago estas la unua de Januaro. Oni ne forgesas
facile sian unuan amon.


                               LESSON 9.

The names of certain quantities are formed from the cardinal numbers
by adding "o", as "dekduo", a dozen; "dudeko", a score; "cento", a
hundred; "milo", a thousand. These names, as well as names of quantities
generally, require to be followed by "da", of, as "dekduo da birdoj", a
dozen (of) birds, but "dekdu birdoj", twelve birds; "dudeko da pomoj", a
score of apples; "cento da sxafoj", or "cent sxafoj", a hundred sheep;
"milo da homoj", a thousand people; "miloj da homoj", thousands of
people.

When these expressions form the object of the verb, it is the name of
the number which takes "-n", not the noun which follows "da", as "Li
acxetis dudekon da sxafoj", He bought a score of sheep.

For "firstly, secondly", etc., "-e" is added to the number, as "unue",
firstly; "kvine", fifthly; "deke", tenthly. (See Lesson 12).

                              VOCABULARY.

   urbo : town.                       acxet- : buy.
   logxanto : inhabitant.             dank- : thank.
   kulero : spoon.                    pet- : beg, request.
   forko : fork.                      bezon- : want, need.
   mono : money.                      kost- : cost.
   prunto : loan.                     poste : afterwards.
   metro : metre.                     tiu cxi : this.
   sxtofo : stuff.                    por : for.
   franko : franc (about 10d.).       re- : prefix, meaning again
   atakanto : assailant.                    or back.
   pago : payment.                    tial : therefore.
   miliono : a million.               aux : or.
   prunt- : lend.                     da : of (after a quantity).

Mi havas cent pomojn. Mi havas centon da pomoj. Tiu cxi urbo havas
milionon da logxantoj. Mi acxetis dekduon da kuleroj, kaj du dekduojn da
forkoj. Mil jaroj (aux, milo da jaroj) faras miljaron.

Unue mi redonas al vi la monon, kiun vi pruntis al mi; due mi dankas
vin por la prunto; trie mi petas vin ankaux poste prunti al mi, kiam mi
bezonos monon.

                                  9A.

To express a certain part or fraction, "-on-" is added to the number
specifying what part, as 1/2, unu "duono"; 1/3, unu "triono"; 1/4,
unu "kvarono"; 1/10, unu "dekono"; 1/1000 unu "milono"; 1/1000000,
unu "milionono". These words, being nouns, take "j" and "n"
when required--3/10, "tri dekonoj"; 27/200, "dudek-sep ducentonoj";
19/1000, "deknaux milonoj. Mi mangxis tri kvaronojn de la kuko", I ate
three-quarters of the cake (see Lesson 35).

To express so many times a number "-obl-" is added to the number, as
"duobla", double; "dekoble", ten times; "trioble kvar estas (or "faras")
dekdu", three times four are twelve; "sepoble ok faras kvindek ses",
seven times eight make fifty-six.

To express "by twos, by tens", etc., "-op-" is added to the number, as
"duope", by twos, or two together; "dekope", by tens; "kvindekope", by
fifties, fifty together, or fifty at a time.

Tri estas duono de ses, ok estas kvar kvinonoj de dek. Kvar metroj da
tiu cxi sxtofo kostas naux frankojn, tial du metroj kostas kvar kaj
duonon frankojn (aux da frankoj). Unu tago estas tricent-sesdek-kvinono,
aux tricent-sesdek-sesono de jaro.

Kvinoble sep estas tridek kvin. Por cxiu tago mi ricevas kvin frankojn,
sed por la hodiauxa tago mi ricevis duoblan pagon, t.e. (= tio estas)
dek frankojn.

Tiuj cxi du amikoj promenas cxiam duope. Kvinope ili sin jxetis sur min,
sed mi venkis cxiujn kvin atakantojn.


                               LESSON 10.

                       VERBS (continued), -i, -u.

In the examples already given the verbs ending in "-as", "-is", "-os"
express "action" or "being" ("state") going on in present, past, or
future time, as "Mi skribas", I am writing; "Li legis", He read; "Ni
iros", We shall go.

If we wish merely to express the idea of action or state indefinitely,
without reference to any time or any subject, the verb must end in "-i,"
as "Vivi", To live; "Mi deziras lerni", I wish to learn; "Ni devas
labori", We must work.

(This is called the INDEFINITE or INFINITIVE Mood (manner of
expression), because not limited by reference to time or subject).

To give an "order" or "command", or to express "will, desire, purpose",
etc., the verb must end in "u", as "Donu al mi panon", Give (to) me
bread; "Iru for", Go away; "Estu felicxa", May you be happy! "Vivu la
regxo!" (Long) live the king!

In such cases as Tell "him to come", I want "you to sing", Allow "her to
speak", we have to use a second sentence with the verb ending in "u",
and beginning with "ke", that, as "Diru al li, ke li venu", Tell (say
to) him, that he come; "Mi deziras, ke vi kantu", I wish, that you sing;
"Permesu al sxi, ke sxi parolu", Allow her, that she speak. Sentences
like the last are often contracted, only the last subject and verb being
used, as "Sxi parolu", Let her speak; "Gxi kusxu", Let it lie; "Ni iru",
Let us go; "Ili dormu", Let them sleep. "Cxu vi volas ke mi tion faru?"
Do you wish me to do that? "Cxu mi tion faru?" Shall I do that?


                              VOCABULARY.

   nomo : name.                       rajd- : ride.
   vesto : coat, clothing.            las- : let, leave.
   kandelo : candle.                  kur- : run.
   dometo : cottage.                  parol- : speak.
   akvo : water.                      viv- : live, have life.
   spegulo : looking-glass.           rest- : rest, remain.
   est- : be.                         honesta : honest.
   tusx- : touch.                     inda : worthy.
   auxskult- : listen.                atenta : attentive.
   pardon- : pardon.                  kara : dear.
   uz- : use.                         gaja : gay, cheerful.
   ordon- : order.                    tia : such.
   babil- : chatter.                  longa : long.
   send- : send.                      sincera : sincere.
   trink- : drink.                    for : away, forth.
   vol- : will, wish.                 forte : strongly.
   bat- : beat.                       sole : alone.
   kuragx- : have courage

Donu al la birdoj akvon, cxar ili volas trinki. Aleksandro ne volas
lerni, kaj tial mi batas Aleksandron. Kiu kuragxas rajdi sur leono? Mi
volis lin bati, sed li forkuris de mi.

Al leono ne donu la manon. Rakontu al mia juna amiko belan historion.
Diru al la patro, ke mi estas diligenta. Diru al mi vian nomon. Ne
skribu al mi tiajn longajn leterojn. Montru al mi vian novan veston.
Infano, ne tusxu la spegulon. Karaj infanoj, estu cxiam honestaj. Ne
auxskultu lin.

Li diras, ke mi estas atenta. Li petas, ke mi estu atenta. Ordonu al li,
ke li ne babilu. Petu lin, ke li sendu al mi kandelon. La dometo estas
inda, ke vi gxin acxetu. Sxi forte deziris, ke li restu viva.

Li venu, kaj mi pardonos al li. Ni estu gajaj, ni uzu bone la vivon,
cxar la vivo ne estas longa. Li ne venu sole, sed alvenu kun sia plej
bona amiko. Mi jam havas mian cxapelon; nun sercxu vi vian.


                               LESSON 11.

                        VERBS (continued), -us.

Sometimes we want to express a "supposition", to say that something
"would" take place, supposing that something else, which is not likely
to occur, were to do so, or that something "would have" taken place if
something else which did not occur had done so. In this case the verb
must end with "-us", as, If I were well (which I am not) I should be
happy (which also I am not), "Se mi estus sana, mi estus felicxa". If
he knew (supposition) that I am here (a fact) he would immediately come
to me (supposition), "Se li scius, ke mi estas tie cxi, li tuj venus
al mi". Compare the two following sentences:-- (i.). "Kvankam vi estas
ricxa, mi dubas, cxu vi estas felicxa", Though you are (in fact) rich, I
doubt whether you are (in fact) happy, (ii.). "Kvankam vi estus ricxa,
mi dubas, cxu, vi estus felicxa", Though (supposing that) you were rich,
I doubt whether you would be happy.

                              VOCABULARY.

   lernanto : pupil.                  pen- : endeavour.
   leciono : lesson.                  imit- : imitate,
   instruanto : teacher,              kvazaux : as if.
   sci- : know.                       io : something.
   pun- : punish.                     efektive : really.
   estim- : esteem.                   supren : upwards.
   lev- : lift, raise.                kvankam : though.
   ten- : hold, keep.                 se : if.

Se la lernanto scius bone sian lecionon, la instruanto lin ne punus. Se
vi scius, kiu li estas, vi lin pli estimus. Ili levis unu manon supren,
kvazaux ili ion tenus. Se mi efektive estus bela, aliaj penus min imiti.
Ho! se mi jam havus la agxon de dekkvin jaroj!


                               LESSON 12.

When we tell of someone doing a certain action we often want to allude
to some circumstance concerning that action, such as the time, or place,
or manner in which it was done, that is, when, or where, or how it was
done.

In the sentences--Yesterday I met your son, "Hieraux mi renkontis vian
filon"; He will go in the evening, "Li iros vespere"; They sat there,
"Ili sidis tie"; She will remain at home, "Sxi restos hejme"; Good
children learn diligently, "Bonaj infanoj lernas diligente"; I will do
it with pleasure, "Mi faros gxin plezure", the words "hieraux, vespere",
show the time, "tie, hejme", show the place, and "diligente, plezure",
show the manner of the action.

(Because these words relate to the verb they are called ADVERBS).

Adverbs may be formed from any word whose sense admits of it, and
especially from adjectives, by means of the termination "e", as "bona",
good, "bone", well; "antaux" before, "antauxe", previously or formerly;
"mateno", morning, "matene", in the morning; "sekvi", to follow,
"sekve", consequently.

When we want the adverb to show "direction towards" any place, time,
etc., either actually or figuratively, "n" is added, as "Li alkuris
hejmen", He ran home. "Ili levis unu manon supren", They raised one
hand upwards. "Antauxen"! Forward! ("n" is also added to nouns to show
direction towards. "Li eniris en la domon", He entered into the house).

Some adverbs are used with adjectives and other adverbs to show the
"degree" of the quality, quantity, etc., as The paper is "very" white,
La papero estas "tre" blanka. "Too" much speaking tires him, La "tro"
multa parolado lacigas lin. I am "as" strong "as" you, Mi estas "tiel"
forta, "kiel" vi (estas forta). He came "very" early, Li venis "tre"
frue.

The following words are in themselves adverbs, and need no special
ending:--

                              VOCABULARY.

   hodiaux : to-day.                  tre : very.
   hieraux : yesterday.               tro : too.
   morgaux : to-morrow.               tute : quite.
   baldaux : soon.                    nur : only.
   ankoraux : yet.                    nepre : surely, without fail.
   jam : already.                     preskaux : nearly.
   jxus : just (time).                apenaux : scarcely.
   nun : now.                         almenaux : at least.
   tuj : immediately.                 ambaux : both.
   denove : again, anew.              ankaux : also.
   cxi denotes proximity.             ne :  not.
   jen : here, there, lo, behold.     jes : yes.
   for : away, forth.                 ja : indeed.
   pli : more.                        ecx : even.
   plej : most.                       cxu : whether, asks a question.
   plu : further.                     ju ... des : the more...the more.

Comparisons are made with--

"pli...ol", more than: "Lakto estas pli nutra ol vino", Milk is more
nutritious than wine.

"malpli...ol", less than: "Vino estas malpli nutra ol lakto", Wine is
less nutritious than milk.

"la plej", the most,
"la malplej", the least: "El cxiuj liaj amikoj Johano estas la plej
sagxa, kaj Georgo la malplej sagxa", Of all his friends John is the
wisest, and George the least wise.

"Ju pli...des pli", the more...the more: "Ju pli li lernas, des pli li
deziras lerni", The more he learns, the more he wishes to learn.

"Ju malpli...des malpli", the less...the less: "Ju malpli li laboras,
des malpli li ricevas", The less he works, the less he gets.

"Ju pli...des malpli", the more...the less: "Ju pli li farigxas granda,
des malpli li estas forta", The taller he becomes, the less strong he
is.

"Ju malpli...des pli", the less...the more: "Ju malpli li pensas, des
pli li parolas", The less he thinks, the more he talks.

For comparisons of equality, as...as, so...as, see Lesson 20.

                              VOCABULARY.

   pordo : door.                      sav- : save.
   kontrakto : contract.              dauxr- : last, continue.
   pastro : pastor, priest.           trancx- : cut.
   fero : iron.                       ekrigard- : glance.
   bastono : stick (rod).             flu- : flow.
   stacio : station.                  ag- : act (do).
   stacidomo : station.               logx- : live, lodge.
   hejmo : home.                      brul- : burn (as a fire).
   furio : fury.                      vetur- : ride (in a vehicle).
   sxipano : sailor.                  aper- : appear.
   kolero : anger.                    postul- : require, demand.
   honesto : honesty.                 pendig- : hang (something)
   dangxero : danger.                 mort- : die.
   koro : heart.                      malsana : ill.
   oficisto : an official.            varma : warm.
   regxo : king.                      varmega : hot.
   balo :  ball, dance.               frua : early.
   humoro : humour.                   plue : further.
   tempo : time.                      returne : back.
   sinjorino : lady, Mrs.             cxar : because, whereas.
   ferm- : shut.

Resti kun leono estas dangxere. La trancxilo trancxas bone, cxar gxi
estas akra. Iru pli rapide. Li fermis kolere la pordon. Lia parolo
fluas dolcxe kaj agrable. Ni faris la kontrakton ne skribe, sed parole.
Honesta homo agas honeste. La pastro, kiu mortis antaux nelonge (antaux
ne longa tempo), logxis longe en nia urbo. Cxu vi gxin ne ricevis
returne? Li estas morte malsana. La fera bastono, kiu kusxis en la
forno, estas brule varmega. Parizo estas tre gaja. Matene frue sxi
alveturis [Footnote: See Lesson 27.] al la stacidomo.

Pardonu al mi, ke mi restis tiel longe. Lia kolero longe dauxris. Li
estas hodiaux en kolera humoro. La regxo baldaux denove sendis alian
bonkoran oficiston. Hodiaux vespere ni havos balon. Kie vi estas? For de
tie-cxi!

Kien li forveturis? Sxi kuris hejmen. Ni iris antauxen, kiel furioj.
Cxio estis bona, kaj ni veturis pluen. La sinjorino ekrigardis returnen.
La sxipanoj postulis, ke oni iru returnen. Mi gxin pendigis tien cxi,
cxar gxi savis mian vivon. Mi neniam sendis tien cxi.


                               LESSON 13.

                              Mal-, -in-.

In Esperanto certain syllables which have a definite meaning are placed
at the beginning (prefixes) or end (suffixes) of words to alter in some
way the meaning of those words.

The prefix "mal-" gives an exactly opposite meaning to the word to which
it is prefixed, as "dekstra", right (hand); "maldekstra", left (hand);
"nova", new; "malnova", old; "helpi", to help, "malhelpi", to hinder;
"fermi", to shut, "malfermi", to open.

The suffix "-in-" denotes the female sex. From "viro", [Footnote: The
word "homo" previously given (Lesson 2) signifies a human being, a
person, without reference to sex; "viro" means a man as distinguished
from a woman.] a man, we get "virino", a woman; "filo", son, "filino",
daughter; "cxevalo", a horse, "cxevalino", a mare; "koko", a cock,
"kokino", a hen.

                              VOCABULARY.

   kresko : growth.                   ferm- : shut.
   haro : hair (substance).           help- : help.
   haroj : hair (of head).            farigx- : become.
   nazo : nose.                       dekstra : right (hand).
   vojo : road.                       meza : middle, medium.
   viro : man.                        dika : thick, stout.
   edzo : husband,                    mola : soft.
   nepo : grandson.                   luma : light (luminous).
   nevo : nephew.                     nobla : noble (character).
   bovo : ox.                         rekta : straight.
   vidvo : widower,                   kurba : curved.
   fiancxo : fiance.                  felicxa : happy.
   nenio : nothing.                   naskita : born.
   turment- : torment.                fermita : shut.
   sent- : feel.                      ecx : even.
   ben- : bless.                      longe : for a long time.
   estim- : have esteem for.          denove : anew, again.

Mia frato ne estas granda, sed li ne estas malgranda, li estas de meza
kresko. Haro estas tre maldika. La nokto estas tiel malluma, ke ni
nenion povas vidi ecx antaux nia nazo. Tiu cxi malfresxa pano estas
malmola, kiel sxtono. Malbonaj infanoj amas turmenti bestojn. Li sentis
sin tiel malfelicxa, ke li malbenis la tagon, en kiu li estis naskita.
Ni forte malestimas tiun cxi malnoblan homon. La fenestro longe estis
nefermita; mi gxin fermis, sed mia frato tuj gxin denove malfermis.
Rekta vojo estas pli mallonga, ol kurba. Ne estu maldanka.

La edzino de mia patro estas mia patrino, kaj la avino de miaj infanoj.
Mia fratino estas tre bela knabino. Mia onklino estas tre bona virino.
Mi vidis vian avinon kun sxiaj kvar nepinoj, kaj kun mia nevino. Mi
havas bovon kaj bovinon. La juna vidvino farigxis denove fiancxino.


                               LESSON 14.

                            Re-, -ad-, ek-.

The prefixes "re-" and "ek-" and the suffix "-ad-" are attached to
verbs.

"Re-" has nearly the same meaning as in English, "back" or "again", as
"re-pagi", to pay back; "re-porti", to carry back; "re-jxeti", to throw
back; "re-salti", to rebound; "re-kanti" to sing again; "re-legi", to
read over again.

"-ad-" denotes the continuance or continued repetition of an action;
it means "goes on doing", or "keeps on doing", or "is in the habit
of", or in the past "used to", as "spiri", to breathe, "spirado",
respiration; "movi", to move, "movado", continued movement; "fumi", to
smoke, "fumado", the habit of smoking; "auxdi", to hear, "auxdado", the
sense of hearing.

"Ek-" has the opposite meaning to "-ad-"; it signifies the beginning of
an action, or a short or sudden action, as "kanti", to sing, "ekkanti",
to begin to sing; "ridi", to laugh, "ekridi", to burst out laughing;
"krii", to cry or call, "ekkrii", to cry out; "iri", to go, "ekiri", to
set out; "dormi", to sleep, "ekdormi", to fall asleep.

                              VOCABULARY.

   rivero : river.                    fal- : fall.
   lando : land.                      atend- : wait for, expect.
   segxo : seat.                      lacig- : make tired.
   dauxro : duration.                 frot- : rub.
   okupo : occupation.                rigard- : look.
   pluvo : rain.                      elrigard- : look out of.
   vagonaro : train.                  salt- : jump.
   surprizo : surprise.               rapida : quick.
   diamanto : diamond.                klara : clear.
   fulmo : lightning.                 lerte : cleverly.
   lumo : a light.                    energie : energetically.
   paf- : shoot.                      kelke : some.
   jxet- : throw.                     cxiuminute : every minute. [p. 84]
   auxd- : hear.                      tra : through.

Li donis al mi monon, sed mi gxin tuj redonis al li. Mi foriras, sed
atendu min, cxar mi baldaux revenos. La suno rebrilas en la klara akvo
de la rivero. Li reiris al sia lando. Sxi rejxetis sin sur la segxon.

En la dauxro de kelke da minutoj mi auxdis du pafojn. La pafado dauxris
tre longe. Lia hierauxa parolo estis tre bela, sed la tro multa parolado
lacigas lin. Li kantas tre belan kanton. La kantado estas agrabla
okupo. Per mia mano mi energie lin frotadis. La pluvo faladis per
riveroj. Cxiuminute sxi elrigardadis tra la fenestro, kaj malbenadis la
malrapidan iradon de la vagonaro.

Mi saltas tre lerte. Mi eksaltis de surprizo. Mi saltadis la tutan tagon
[Footnote: See Lesson 26 (iii.)] de loko al loko. Kiam vi ekparolis, mi
atendis auxdi ion novan. La diamanto havas belan brilon. Sxi lasis la
diamanton ekbrili. Du ekbriloj do fulmo trakuris tra la malluma cxielo.


                               LESSON 15.

                           VERBS (continued).

In all the examples already given the Subject of the Sentence is the
"doer" of the action, but often it is "the one to whom the action is
done" who occupies our thoughts, and of whom we wish to speak. This one
then becomes the subject, and the form of the Verb is changed. Instead
of saying "The police are searching for the thief," "Someone has broken
the window," "Someone is going to finish the work to-morrow," we say
"The thief is being sought for by the police," "The window has been
broken," "The work is going to be finished to-morrow."

(Note the convenience of this form when we do not know or do not wish to
mention the doer).


In Esperanto the terminations "-ata", "being", denoting "incompleteness"
or "present" time, "-ita", "having been", denoting "completeness"
or "past" time, and "-ota", "about to be" (going to be), denoting
"action not yet begun", or "future" time, are added to the root of the
verb, as "ami", to love, "amata", being loved, "amita", having been
loved, "amota", going to be loved. "La sxtelisto estas sercxata de la
policanoj" [Footnote: "De" is used after these participles to denote the
"doer" of the action.], The thief is being searched for by the police.
"La fenestro estas rompita", The window has been broken. "La laboro
estas finota morgaux", The work is going to be finished to-morrow.

It will be seen that these words ending in "-ata", "-ita", "-ota"
describe the subject or show the "condition" or "state" in which
the subject is, therefore they are adjectival; the thief is a
"searched-for" thief, the window was a "broken" window, the work
is a "going-to-be-finished" work (compare The work will be "ready"
to-morrow). They are called PARTICIPLES, and being adjectival, take
"j" when the noun to which they belong is plural.


   Mi estas tenata ............. I am (being) held.
   Li estis tenata ............. He was (being) held.
   Ni estos tenataj ............ We shall be (being) held.
   Vi estus tenataj ............ You would be (being) held.
   Ke ili estu tenataj ......... That they may be (being) held.
   Estu tenata ................. Be (being) held.
   Esti tenata ................. To be (being) held.

   Mi estas vidita ............. I am (in the state of) having
                                    been seen, or, I have been
                                    seen.
   Li estis vidita ............. He was (in the state of) having
                                    been seen, or, he had been
                                    seen.
   Ni estos viditaj ............ We shall be (in the state of)
                                    having been seen, or, we
                                    shall have been seen.
   Vi estus viditaj ............ You would be (in the state of)
                                    having been seen, or, you
                                    would have been seen.
   (Ke) ili estu viditaj ....... (That) they may be (in the
                                    state of) having been seen,
                                    or, that they may have been
                                    seen.
   Esti vidita ................. To be (in the state of) having
                                    been seen, or, to have been
                                    seen.

   Mi estas lauxdota  .......... I am about (going) to be praised.
   Sxi estis lauxdota .......... She was about (going) to be
                                    praised.
   Ni estos lauxdotaj .......... We shall be about (going) to
                                    be praised.
   Vi estus lauxdotaj .......... You would be about (going)
                                    to be praised.
   (Ke) ili estu lauxdotaj ..... (That) they should be about
                                    (going) to be praised.
   Esti lauxdota ............... To be about (going) to be
                                    praised.


                              VOCABULARY.

   komercajxo : commodity.            sciig- : inform.
   surtuto : overcoat.                kasx- : hide.
   sxuldo : debt.                     pens- : think.
   ringo : ring.                      kapt- : capture.
   projekto : project.                trankvila : quiet.
   ingxeniero : civil engineer.       tuta : all, whole.
   fervojo : railroad.                grava : important.
   pregxo : prayer.                   ora : golden.
   pasero : sparrow.                  volonte : willingly.
   aglo : eagle.                      sekve : consequently.
   invit- : invite.                   laux : according to.
   konstru- : construct.

Mi estas amata. Mi estis amata. Mi estos amata. Mi estus amata. Estu
amata. Esti amata. Vi estas lavita. Vi estis lavita. Vi estos lavita.
Vi estus lavita. Estu lavita. Esti lavita. Li estas invitota. Li estis
invitota. Li estos invitota. Li estus invitota. Estu invitota. Esti
invitota. Tiu cxi komercajxo estas cxiam volonte acxetata de mi. La
surtuto estas acxetita de mi; sekve gxi apartenas al mi. Kiam via domo
estis konstruata, mia domo estis jam longe konstruita. Mi sciigas, ke
de nun la sxuldoj de mia filo ne estos pagataj de mi. Estu trankvila,
mia tuta sxuldo estos pagita al vi baldaux. Mia ora ringo ne estus
tiel longe sercxata, se gxi ne estus tiel lerte kasxita de vi. Laux la
projekto de la ingxenieroj tiu cxi fervojo estas konstruota en la dauxro
de du jaroj; sed mi pensas, ke gxi estos konstruata pli ol tri jarojn.
Kiam la pregxo estis finita, li sin levis.

Auxgusto estas mia plej amata filo. Mono havata estas pli grava ol
havita. Pasero kaptita estas pli bona, ol aglo kaptota.


                               LESSON 16.

Another set of participles is used to describe or show the condition
or state of the "doer" of the action, namely "-anta", denoting
"incompleteness" or present time, "-inta", denoting "completeness" or
past time, and "-onta", denoting "action not yet begun", or future time,
as "Sur la arbo staras kantanta birdo (aux birdo kantanta"), On the tree
is a singing bird (or a bird singing); "En la venonta somero mi vizitos
vin", In the coming summer I shall visit you; "La pasinta nokto estis
tre pluva", The past night was very wet (rainy).


   Mi estas mangxanta .......... I am (in the act of) eating.
   Li estis mangxanta .......... He was eating.
   Ni estos mangxantaj ......... We shall be eating.
   Vi estus mangxantaj ......... You would be eating.
   (Ke) ili estu mangxantaj .... (That) they may be eating.
   Esti mangxanta .............. To be eating.
   Estu mangxanta .............. Be (in the act of) eating.

   Mi estas teninta ............ I am (in the state of) having
                                    held, or, I have held.
   Li estis teninta ............ He was (in the state of) having
                                    held, or, he had held.
   Ni estos tenintaj ........... We shall be (in the state of)
                                    having held, or, we shall
                                    have held.
   Vi estus tenintaj ........... You would be (in the state of)
                                    having held, or, you would
                                    have held.
   (Ke) ili estu tenintaj ...... (That)  they may be (in the
                                    state of) having held, or,
                                    (that) they may have held.
   Esti teninta ................ To be (in the state of) having
                                    held, or, to have held.

   Mi estas dironta ............ I am about (going) to say.
   Li estis dironta ............ He was about (going) to say.
   Ni estos dirontaj ........... We shall be about (going) to
                                    say.
   Vi estus dirontaj ........... You would be about (going)
                                    to say.
   (Ke) ili estu dirontaj ...... (That)  they  may   be about
                                    (going) to say.
   Esti dironta ................ To be about (going) to say.


The participles are made into nouns by ending them with "o" instead of
"a", as "Kiam Nikodemo batas Jozefon, tiam Nikodemo estas la batanto,
kaj Jozefo estas la batato", When Nicodemus beats Joseph, then Nicodemus
is the beater, and Joseph is the one being beaten.


   La batanto ...... The one who is beating.
   La batinto ...... The one who was beating.
   La batonto ...... The one who is about (going) to beat.
   La batato ....... The one who is being beaten.
   La batito ....... The one who has been beaten.
   La batoto ....... The one who is about to be beaten.


Note that the participles which have "n" in the termination refer to the
"doer"; they are called "active" participles. Those without "n" refer to
the one to whom the action is done; they are "passive" participles.


                              VOCABULARY.

   tempo : time.                      ripet- : repeat.
   mondo : world.                     arest- : arrest.
   lingvo : language.                 jugx- : judge.
   nombro : number.                   konduk- : lead, conduct.
   legendo : legend.                  vojagx- : travel, journey.
   loko : place.                      sxtel- : steal.
   salono : drawing-room.             ripoz- : rest, repose.
   eraro : mistake.                   diradis : used to say (tell).
   soldato : soldier.                 estonta : future (about to be).
   strato : street.                   vera : true.
   pek- : sin.                        intence : intentionally.
   fal- : fall.                       facile : easily.
   mensog- : tell a lie.              antauxe : formerly, previously.
   pas- : pass (as time passes).      dum : while, whilst, during.
   atend- : wait, expect.             neniam : never.
   sav- : save, rescue.               neniu : nobody.
   danc- : dance.                     sen : without.
   kred- : believe.                   senmove : motionless.

Fluanta akvo estas pli pura, ol akvo staranta senmove. La falinta homo
ne povas sin levi. La tempo pasinta jam neniam revenos; la tempon
venontan neniu ankoraux konas. Venu, ni atendas vin, Savonto de la
mondo. En la lingvo Esperanto ni vidas la estontan lingvon de la tuta
mondo. La nombro de la dancantoj estis granda. Gxi estas la legendo,
kiun la veraj kredantoj cxiam ripetas. Li kondukis la vojagxanton al la
loko, kie la sxtelintoj ripozis. Al homo, pekinta senintence, Dio facile
pardonas. La soldatoj kondukis la arestitojn tra la stratoj. Homo, kiun
oni devas jugxi, estas jugxoto.


                                  16A.

Nun li diras al mi la veron. Hieraux li diris al mi la veron. Li cxiam
diradis al mi la veron. Kiam vi vidis nin en la salono, li jam antauxe
diris al mi la veron (aux, li estis dirinta al mi la veron). Li diros al
mi la veron. Kiam vi venos al mi, li jam antauxe diros al mi la veron
(aux, li estos dirinta al mi la veron; aux, antaux ol vi venos al mi, li
diros al mi la veron). Se mi petus lin, li dirus al mi la veron. Mi ne
farus la eraron, se li antauxe dirus al mi la veron (aux, se li estus
dirinta al mi la veron). Kiam mi venos, diru al mi la veron. Kiam mia
patro venos, diru al mi antauxe la veron (aux, estu dirinta al mi la
veron). Mi volas diri al vi la veron. Mi volas, ke tio, kion mi diris,
estu vera (aux, mi volas esti dirinta la veron).


                               LESSON 17.


Participles can be used as adverbs when they refer to the subject, and
tell some circumstance about the action, as "Walking along the street,
John saw your friend." "Walking along the street" tells the circumstance
under which the subject, John, saw your friend; therefore "walking" is
adverbial--"Promenante sur la strato, Johano vidis vian amikon." If it
were the friend who was walking, it must be "Johano vidis vian amikon,
promenantan sur la strato."

(Examine in this way the sentences in the following exercise).

                              VOCABULARY.

   braceleto : bracelet.              medit- : meditate.
   sxtelisto : thief.                 port- : carry.
   vorto : word.                      demand- : ask.
   duko : duke.                       sxpar- : save.
   juvelo : jewel.                    edzigx- : marry.
   juvelujo : jewel-case.             hont- : be ashamed.
   dolaro : dollar.                   ir- : go.
   instruo : instruction.             profunda : deep.
   planko : floor.                    kelka : some.
   imperiestro : emperor.             ia : some (kind), any (kind).
   okazo : opportunity, occurrence,   kredeble : probably.
         chance.                      trans : across.
   serv- : serve.                     tio cxi : this (thing).

Promenante sur la strato, mi falis. Trovinte pomon, mi gxin mangxis. Li
venis al mi tute ne atendite. Li iris tre meditante kaj tre malrapide.
Ni hontis, ricevinte instruon de la knabo. La imperiestra servanto
eliris, portante kun si la braceleton. Profunde salutante, li rakontis,
ke oni kaptis la sxteliston. Ne dirante vorton, la dukino malfermis
sian juvelujon. Laborinte unu jaron, kaj sxparinte kelkajn dolarojn, mi
edzigxis kun mia Mario. Transirinte la riveron, li trovis la sxteliston.
Rigardinte okaze la plankon, sxi vidis ian libron, forgesitan kredeble
de elirinta veturanto.


                               LESSON 18.

                             Suffix -ist-.

The suffix "-ist-" denotes one who occupies himself with or devotes
himself to any special thing, as a business or a hobby, as "jugxi", to
judge, "jugxisto", a judge; "servi", to serve, "servisto", a servant;
"kuraci", to treat (as a doctor), "kuracisto", a doctor; "lavi", to
wash, "lavisto", a laundryman.

                              VOCABULARY.

   boto : boot.                       transskrib- : transcribe, copy.
   sxuo : shoe.                       kuir- : cook.
   maro : sea.                        veturig- : drive (carriage, etc.).
   mehxaniko : mechanics.             tromp- : deceive.
   hxemio : chemistry.                okup- : occupy, employ.
   diplomato : diplomatist.           teks- : weave.
   fiziko : physics.                  diversa(j) : various.
   scienco : science.                 simple : simply.
   dron- : be drowned, sink.          je (indefinite meaning).
   verk- : work mentally, write,                   [Lessons 26, 40.]
         compose.

La botisto faras botojn kaj sxuojn. Sxtelistojn neniu lasas en sian
domon. La kuragxa maristo dronis en la maro. Verkisto verkas librojn,
kaj skribisto simple transskribas paperojn. Ni havas diversajn
servantojn--kuiriston, cxambristinon, infanistinon, kaj veturigiston.
Kiu okupas sin je mehxaniko estas mehxankisto, kaj kiu okupas sin je
hxemio estas hxemiisto. Diplomatiiston oni povas ankaux nomi diplomato,
[Footnote: See Lesson 45.] sed fizikiston oni ne povas nomi fiziko,
[Footnote: See Lesson 45.] cxar fiziko estas la nomo de la scienco mem.
Unu tagon [Footnote: See Lesson 26.] (en unu tago) venis du trompantoj,
kiuj diris, ke ili estas teksistoj.


                               LESSON 19.

                         Suffixes -ig-, -igx-.

"-ig-" means "to make" or "cause" someone or something to be or to do
that which the word denotes, while "-igx-" means "to become" so or such
oneself. Thus from "rugxa", red, we get "rugxigi", to make (something
or someone) red, "rugxigxi", to become red oneself, to blush; "klara",
clear, "klarigi", to make clear, to explain, "klarigxi", to become
clear; "sidi", to sit, to be sitting, "sidigi", to cause someone to sit,
"sidigxi", to become seated, to sit down; "kun", with, "kunigi", to
connect, "kunigxi", to become connected with; "devi", to have to (must),
"devigi", to compel; "fari", to do or make, "farigxi", to become; "for",
away, "forigi", make (go) away.

                              VOCABULARY.

   printempo : spring.                kapo : head.
   glacio : ice.                      botelo : bottle.
   vetero : weather.                  dev- : have to, must.
   broso : brush.                     kurac- : treat as a doctor.
   relo : rail.                       pren- : take.
   rado : wheel.                      pend- : hang.
   cxapo : bonnet, cap.               blov- : blow.
   arbeto : little tree.              ekbrul- : begin to burn.
   vento : wind.                      rid- : laugh.
   brancxo : branch.                  romp- : break.
   vizagxo : face.                    fluida : fluid.
   kuvo : tub.                        kota : dirty, muddy.
   kolego : companion, colleague      natura : natural.
   Hebreo : Hebrew.                   seka : dry.
   Kristano : Christian.              tamen : however, nevertheless, yet

Oni tiel malhelpis al mi, ke mi malbonigis mian tutan laboron. Forigu
vian fraton, cxar li malhelpas al ni. Venigu la kuraciston, cxar mi
estas malsana.

Li venigis al si el Berlino multajn librojn (multe da libroj).

Li paligxis de timo, kaj poste li rugxigxis de honto. En la printempo
la glacio kaj la negxo fluidigxas. En la kota vetero mia vesto forte
malpurigxis; tial mi prenis broson kaj purigis la veston. Mia onklo ne
mortis per natura morto, sed li tamen ne mortigis sin mem, kaj ankaux
estis mortigita de neniu; unu tagon, [Footnote: See Lesson 26, Note
iii.] promenante apud la reloj de fervojo, li falis sub la radojn de
veturanta vagonaro, kaj mortigxis. Mi ne pendigis mian cxapon sur tiu
cxi arbeto; sed la vento forblovis de mia kapo la cxapon, kaj gxi,
flugante, pendigxis sur la brancxoj de la arbeto. Sidigu vin (aux,
sidigxu), sinjoro!

Lia malgaja vizagxo ridigis lian amikon. La tutan nokton ili pasigis
maldorme, kaj ekbruligis pli ol dekses kandelojn. Mi senvestigis la
infanon de liaj noktaj vestoj, kaj starigis lin en la kuvon; poste mi
sekigis lin. Li amikigxis kun malbonaj kolegoj. Malricxa hebreo volis
kristanigxi. La botelo falis kaj rompigxis. Sxi farigxis lia edzino. Iom
post iom, sxi tute trankviligxis.


                   *       *       *       *       *


                                 NOTES.

1.--In "pluvas", it rains; "tondras", it thunders; "estas bela tago",
it is a fine day; "estas bele", it is fine; "estas vere, ke...", it is
true that..., etc., "it" is left out, because it does not stand for any
"thing." The adverbs "bele", "vere", are used because no "thing" is
mentioned.

2.--"Ni havas fresxajn lakton kaj panon" means "Ni havas fresxan lakton
kaj fresxan panon", We have new milk and new bread. "Ni havas fresxan
lakton kaj panon" means We have bread and new milk.

3.--"La angla, franca kaj germana lingvoj estas malfacilaj", The
English, French and German languages are difficult. "Angla", "franca",
"germana" do not take "j" because each refers to only one language,
while "malfacilaj" refers to all those mentioned.


                               LESSON 20.

The words "ia, tia; kial, tial; kiam, cxiam, neniam; kie, kiel, tiel;
io, kio, tio, cxio, nenio; kiu, cxiu, neniu", have already been met
with. They belong to a series whose use will best be seen from the
following examples:--

"ia" denotes kind or quality. "Kia" floro estas la plej bela? "Ia" kaj
"cxia" floro estas beta, "nenia" estas malbela. Mi admiras la rozon;
"tia" floro la plej placxas al mi. "What (kind of)" flower is the most
beautiful? "Any kind" and "every kind" of flower is beautiful, "no kind"
is ugly. I admire the rose, "that kind of" flower pleases me the most.

"ial", motive, reason. "Kial" li iros en Parizon? Mi ne scias; "ial"
li foriros, sed "cxial" estus pli bone resti en Londono. Li deziras
foriri, "tial" li foriros. "Why" is he going (will he go) to Paris?
I know not; "for some reason" he is going, but "for every reason" (on
every account) it would be better to remain in London. He wishes to go,
"therefore" (for that reason) he will go.

"iam", time. "Kiam" vi venos min viziti? "Iam" mi venos, "kiam" mi havos
libertempon; vi "cxiam" havas libertempon, mi "neniam". Postmorgaux
estos festo, "tiam" mi venos. "When" will you come to visit me?
"Sometime" I will come, "when" (at what time) I shall have a holiday;
you "always" (at all times) have a holiday, I "never" (at no time). (The
day) after to-morrow will be a festival (a general holiday); I will come
"then" (at that time).

"ie", place. "Kie" estas mia cxapelo? Gxi devas esti "ie", sed mi
sercxis gxin "cxie", kaj "nenie" mi povas trovi gxin. Ha, nun mi ekvidas
gxin "tie". "Where" is my hat? It must be "somewhere", but I have looked
for it "everywhere", and "nowhere" can I find it. Ha, now I see it
"there".

"iel", manner. "Kiel" vi faros tion cxi? Mi ne scias; mi "cxiel" provis
gxin fari, sed mi "neniel" sukcesis. Johano sukcesis "iel"; eble li
faris gxin "tiel". "How" will you do this? I do not know; I have tried
in every way to do it, but I have "in no way" (not at all) succeeded.
John succeeded "in some way" (somehow); perhaps he did it "so (in such a
way").

"ies", possession. "Kies" devo estas tio cxi? Eble gxi estas "ties";
sendube gxi estas "ies". "Cxies" devo estas "nenies". "Whose" duty
is this? Perhaps it is "that one's (person's)"; doubtless it is
"somebody's. Everybody's" duty is "nobody's."

"io", thing. "Kio" malplacxas al vi? Nun "nenio" malplacxas al mi,
"cxio" estas bona. Antaux tri tagoj "io" tre malplacxis al mi, sed mi ne
parolas pri "tio" nun. "What" displeases you? Now "nothing" displeases
me, "all" is well. Three days ago "something" greatly displeased me, but
I am not speaking about "that" now.

"iom", quantity. "Kiom" da mono vi bezonas? Mi havas "tiom", mi povas
prunti al vi "iom", sed ne "cxiom". Se mi pruntus al vi "cxiom", mi mem
havus "neniom". "How much" money do you need ? I have "so much (that
quantity)", I can lend you "some", but not "all". If I were to lend you
"all", I myself should have "none".

"iu" denotes individuality, person, or thing specified. "Kiu" estis cxe
la balo? "Cxiu, kiu" estis invitita, estis tie, "neniu" forestis. "Iu,
kiun" mi mem ne konas, venis kun "tiu kiu" vizitis vin hierau. "Who" was
at the ball? "Everybody who" had been invited was there, "nobody" was
absent. "Somebody, whom" I myself do not know, came with "that person
who" visited you yesterday.

It will be seen from these examples that the words beginning with
"K" either "ask questions" or "refer" to some person or thing before
mentioned. Those beginning with "T" point to a "definite" time, place,
etc. Those with "Cx" signify "each" or "every", and in the plural "all".
Those without a letter prefixed are "indefinite", meaning some or any;
and those with "nen-" are "negative", meaning "no, none".

The words ending in "ia" and those in "iu" can take the plural "j" and
accusative "n".

The words in "io" take "n", but the sense does not permit of their
taking "j".

The words in "ie" take the "n" denoting direction.

The word "cxi", signifying nearness, is used with the "T" series (words
meaning "that"), to denote the one near "i.e., this", as "Tio cxi", this
thing; "Tiu cxi", this person; "Tie cxi", or, "cxi tie", here, etc.

The word "ajn", ever, is used with the "K" series to give a more
inclusive and wider meaning, as "Kio ajn", whatever; "Kiu ajn", whoever;
"Kiam ajn", whenever; "Kiom ajn", however much.

Comparisons of equality are made with the words--

"tiel ... kiel", as Vi estas "tiel" forta, "kiel" mi, You are "as"
strong "as" I.

"tia ... kia", as "Tia" domo, "kia" tiu, estas malofta, "Such" a house
"as" that is rare.

"sama ... kia", as Mia bastono estas "tia sama, kia" la via, My stick
is "the same as" yours.

"sama ... kiel", as Gxia uzado estas "tia sama, kiel" en la aliaj
lingvoj, Its use is "the same as" in the other languages. Vi cxiam
laboradas al tiu "sama" celo, "kiel" mi, You are always working towards
that "same" end (aim) "as" I.

Any of the above series of words whose sense admits of it can be used as
adjectives, adverbs, etc., and in combination with prefixes, suffixes,
or other words, as "cxiama", continual, eternal; "tiea", of that place.
"Kioma" is used for asking the time, as "Kioma horo estas"? What time is
it?


                           CORRELATIVE WORDS.

   +-------------------------------------------------------------------+
   |        |    *      |    K      |    T     |     CX    |   Nen-    |
   |        |INDEFINITE.|QUESTIONING| DEFINITE.| INCLUSIVE.| NEGATIVE. |
   |        |           | RELATIVE. |          |           |           |
   |        |Some, any. |   What,   |   That.  |   Each,   | No, none. |
   |        |           |  which.   |          |every, all.|           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Ia     |    Kia    |   Tia    |   Cxia    |  Nenia    |
   |QUALITY | Some kind | What kind |That kind | Each kind | No kind   |
   |Kind of | Any kind  |           |   Such   |Every kind |           |
   |        |           |           |          |           |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Ial    |   Kial    |  Tial    |  Cxial    |  Nenial   |
   | MOTIVE |For some   |For what   |For that  |For each   |For no     |
   | Reason |   reason  |   reason  |   reason |   reason  |   reason  |
   |Purpose |For any    |Why        |Therefore |For every  |           |
   |        |   reason  |           |          |   reason  |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |   Iam     |   Kiam    |  Tiam    |   Cxiam   |  Neniam   |
   | TIME   | Sometime  | At what   | At that  | Each time |At no time |
   |        | Any time  |     time  |    time  |Every time |   Never   |
   |        |           |   When    |  Then    |  Always   |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Ie     |   Kie     |   Tie    |   Cxie    |   Nenie   |
   | PLACE  |In some    | At what   | At that  | At each   | At no     |
   |        |     place |     place |    place |     place |    place  |
   |        | Somewhere |  Where    |  There   | At every  | Nowhere   |
   |        | Anywhere  |           |          |     place |           |
   |        |           |           |          | Everywhere|           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Iel    |    Kiel   |   Tiel   |   Cxiel   |  Neniel   |
   |MANNER  |In some way|In what way| In that  | In each   | In no way |
   |        |In any way |How        |   way    |    way    | Nohow     |
   |        |Somehow,   |As, like   | So       | In every  |           |
   |        |anyhow     |           |          |    way    |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Ies    |   Kies    |  Ties    |   Cxies   |  Nenies   |
   |POSSES- | Someone's | What      |That one's|Each one's | No one's  |
   | SION   | Anyone's  |  person's |          |Everyone's |           |
   |        |           | Whose     |          |           |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |   Io      |   Kio     |  Tio     |   Cxio    |  Nenio    |
   | THING  | Something | What thing| That     | Everything| Nothing   |
   |        | Anything  | What      |   thing  |           |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Iom    |   Kiom    |   Tiom   |   Cxiom   |   Neniom  |
   |QUANTITY|Some(of the| What      |That      |Every      |None of the|
   |        |  quantity)|   quantity|  quantity|  quantity |  quantity |
   |        |           | How much  |So much   |All of the |           |
   |        |           |           |          |  quantity |           |
   |--------+-----------+-----------+----------+-----------+-----------|
   |        |    Iu     |   Kiu     |   Tiu    |   Cxiu    |   Neniu   |
   |INIVIDU-| Someone   |What person|That      |Each person| No one    |
   |  ALITY | Anyone    |Which thing|  person  |Everyone   | Nobody    |
   |        |           |Who  Which |That      | Cxiuj =   |           |
   |        |           |           |(specified) all,      |           |
   |        |           |           |  thing   | all the...|           |
   +-------------------------------------------------------------------+


                              VOCABULARY.

   ankro : anchor.                    prov- : attempt, try.
   maniero : manner, way.             sukces- : succeed.
   riprocxo : reproach.               perd- : lose.
   konscienco : conscience.           merit- : deserve.
   propono : proposal, offer.         kompren- : understand.
   rando : edge.                      libera : free.
   sxipo : ship.                      certa : certain, sure.
   dubo : doubt.                      utila : useful.
   demando : question.                fremda : strange.
   admir- : admire.                   necesa : necessary.
   placx- : be pleasing.              ekster : beyond, outside.
   supoz- : suppose.

"Ia." La maro estas tie pli profunda, ol povas atingi ia ankro. En
ia maniero. Sen ia riprocxo de konscienco. Mi scias, en kia loko mi
certe lin trovos. Kia estas la vetero? Kian malbonon mi al vi faris?
Tiamaniere li faris cxion. Li invitis lin veni en tian kaj tian lokon.
Ne cxia birdo kantas. Ekster cxia dubo. Nenia homo meritas tian punon.
Tiaj libroj estas malutilaj. Iafoje li vizitas nin.

"Ial." Ial li ne povis dormi. Kial vi ne respondas al mi? Mi ne
komprenis vian demandon, tial mi ne respondis. La homoj ne komprenas unu
la alian, kaj tial ili tenas sin fremde. Cxial tio estas la plej bona.

"Iam." Mi iam vin amis. Kio vivas, necese devas iam morti. Kiam vi
foriros? En la luna nokto, kiam cxiuj dormis, tiam sxi sidis sur la
rando de la sxipo. Estu por cxiam benata! Sxi antauxe neniam vidis
hundon.

                            VOCABULARY 20A.

   mono : money.                      monto : mountain.
   monujo : purse.                    ganto : glove.
   juneco : youth.                    opinio : opinion.
   reto : net.                        vocxo : voice.
   ideo : idea.                       prezid- : preside.
   gajno : gain.                      alpren- : adopt.
   tauxg- : be fit, suitable.         stranga : strange, curious.
   fart- : be, fare (as to health).   komprenebla :  understandable.
                                      subita : sudden.

"Ie." Kie estas la knaboj? Kien vi iris? Mi restas tie cxi. Li perdis
sian monujon ie en la urbo, sed kie li perdis gxin, li ne scias. Mi
volonte el tie venis tien cxi. Li petis sxin, ke sxi diru al li, de kie
si venas. [Footnote: See note in Lesson 17.] Por la juneco cxie staras
retoj. Cxie estas floroj, kaj nenie oni povas trovi pli belajn.

"Iel." Kiel bela! Cxu mi tauxgas kiel regxo? Tiel finigxis la felicxa
tago. Ili brilis kiel diamantoj. Kiel vi fartas? Iel li malkomprenis
min. Mia edzino pensis tiel same, kiel mi. Mi neniel povas kompreni,
kion vi diras. Tre stranga kaj neniel komprenebla! Mi elektis lin kiel
prezidanto. Mi elektis lin kiel prezidanton.

"Ies." Kies ganto tiu cxi estas? Mi neniam alprenas ties opinion. Subite
sxi ekauxdis ies fortan malagrablan vocxon. Cxies ideo estas diversa.
Bona amiko, sen kies helpo li neniam ekvidus tiun cxi landon. Ies perdo
ne estas cxiam ies gajno. Ies perdo estas ofte nenies gajno.

                            VOCABULARY 20B.

   ornamo : ornament.                 hxino : Chinese.
   pupilo : pupil (of eye).           decido : decision.
   centimo : centime.                 ced- : give up, yield, cede.
   forto : strength, power.           forlas- : forsake, leave.
   nesto : nest.                      prudenta : reasonable, prudent.
   Fortuno : fortune.                 firma : firm, stable.
   funto : pound (weight or money).   sterlinga : sterling.
   lango : tongue.                    kontraux : against, opposite.
   gusto : taste.                     pro : for, owing to.
   okulo : eye.

"Io." Mi sentas, ke io okazas. Neniam mi ion al vi donis. Mi volas fari
al vi ion bonan. Kio tio cxi estas? Kia ornamo tiu cxi estas? Kion mi
vidas? Tio cxi estas cxio, pri kio mi parolis. Mi nenion cedos al vi.
Nenion faru kontraux la patrino. Antaux cxio estu fidela al vi mem. Sxi
eksentis ion tian, kion sxi mem komence ne povas kompreni.

"Iom." Sxi parolis iom kolere. La pupiloj de la okuloj iom post iom
malgrandigxis. Kiu estas tiom senprudenta, ke li povas gxin kredi? Kiom
da mono vi havas? Mi havas neniom. Donu al mi tiom da akvo, kiom da
vino.

"Iu." Iu venas; kiu gxi estas? Cxu iu kuragxus tion fari? Cxiu penis sin
savi, kiel li povis. Lingvo, en kiu neniu nin komprenos. Neniu el ili
povis savi la dronanton. Li al neniu helpis iam ecx per unu centimo. Ni
iros cxiuj kune. Mi konas neniun en tiu urbo. Tio cxi estas super cxiuj
homaj fortoj.

                                  20C.

Oni petis lin atendi iom kun lia forveturo. Tiuj cxi nestoj ofte estas
pli grandaj, ol la dometoj de la tieaj homoj. Li forveturis kun firma
decido forlasi por cxiam tiun cxi sendankan landon. Se iu tion vidus, li
malbenus la Fortunon. Mi donus cent funtojn sterlingajn, se bova lango
povus havi por mi tian bonan guston kiel por vi. Kioma


                               LESSON 21.

                          Suffixes -eg-, -et-.


The suffixes "-eg-" and "-et-" are opposites; "-eg-" denotes a great
size or degree, and "-et-" a small size or degree, of that which the
word signifies, as "domo", a house, "domego", a mansion, "dometo", a
cottage; "sxnuro", a cord, "sxnurego", a rope, "sxnureto", a string;
"monto", a mountain, "montego", a huge mountain, "monteto", a hill;
"ami", to love, "amegi", to idolise, "ameti", to have a liking for;
"ridi", to laugh, "ridegi", to shout with laughter, to guffaw, "rideti",
to smile.

"-eg-" and "-et-" denote a greater or smaller size or degree than is
expressed by "very large" or "very small". The adjective "ega" means
"enormous, huge", and "eta" means "tiny".

                              VOCABULARY.

   arbaro : a wood.                   somero : summer.
   bruo : noise.                      kampo : field.
   kalesxo : carriage.                piedego : paw.
   korto : courtyard.                 forir- : go away.
   piedo : foot.                      murmur- : murmur.
   teruro : terror.                   varma : warm.
   militistaro : army.                densa : dense.
   serio : series.

En varmega tago mi amas promeni en arbaro. Kun bruo oni malfermis la
pordegon, kaj la kalesxo enveturis en la korton. Tio cxi estas jam ne
simpla pluvo, sed pluvego. Grandega hundo metis sur min sian antauxan
piedegon, kaj mi de teruro ne sciis, kion fari. Antaux nia militistaro
staris granda serio da pafilegoj. En tiu nokto blovis terura ventego.
Kun plezurego. Li deziregis denove foriri.

Tuj post la hejto la forno estis varmega, post unu horo gxi estis nur
varma, post du horoj gxi estis nur iom varmeta, kaj post tri horoj gxi
estis jam tute malvarma. Mi acxetis por la infanoj tableton kaj kelke da
segxetoj. En nia lando sin ne trovas montoj, sed nur montetoj. En somero
ni trovas malvarmeton en densaj arbaroj. Li sidas apud la tablo kaj
dormetas. Mallargxa vojeto kondukas tra tiu cxi kampo al nia domo. Sur
lia vizagxo mi vidis gxojan rideton. Antaux la virino aperis malgranda,
beleta hundo. Pardonu, li murmuretis.


                               LESSON 22.

                              Suffix -il-.

The suffix "-il-" denotes the "instrument" by means of which something
is done, as "razi", to shave, "razilo", a razor; "rigli", to bolt,
"riglilo", a bolt; "butero", butter, "buterilo", a churn; "kuraci", to
treat (as a doctor), "kuracilo", a medicine.

                              VOCABULARY.

   viando : meat, flesh.              komb- : comb.
   posxo : pocket.                    sxtop- : stop up.
   korko : cork (substance).          sxlos- : lock.
   argxento : silver.                 glit- : glide, slide.
   telero : plate.                    direkt- : direct, steer.
   sano : health.                     difekt- : damage.
   butero : butter.                   montr- : show.
   hak- : chop, hew.                  pes- : weigh something.
   seg- : saw.                        tir- : draw, pull.
   fos- : dig.                        vetur- : drive (in a vehicle).
   kudr- : sew.                       frosta : frosty.
   tond- : clip, shear.               magneta : magnetic.

Per hakilo ni hakas, per segilo ni segas, per fosilo ni fosas, per
kudrilo ni kudras, per tondilo ni tondas. La trancxilo estis tiel
malakra, ke mi ne povis trancxi per gxi la viandon, kaj mi devis uzi
mian posxan trancxilon. Cxu vi havas korktirilon, por malsxtopi la
botelon? Mi volis sxlosi la pordon, sed mi perdis la sxlosilon. Sxi
kombas al si la harojn per argxenta kombilo. En somero ni veturas per
diversaj veturiloj, kaj en vintro per glitveturilo. Hodiaux estas
bela frosta vetero; tial mi prenos miajn glitilojn kaj iros gliti. La
direktilisto de "Pinta" difektis la direktilon. La magneta montrilo. La
unua montrilo en la plej multaj malsanoj estas la lango. Li metis gxin
sur la teleron de pesilo.


                               LESSON 23.

                         Suffixes -an-, -estr-.

The suffix "-an-" signifies a "member", an "inhabitant" of a country,
town, etc., or a member of a party, society, religion, etc. "Euxropano",
a European; "Londonano", a Londoner; "urbo", a town or city, "urbano",
a citizen; "klubo", a club, "klubano", a member of a club. "Ano", a
member.

"-estr-" denotes the "head" of a State, town, society, etc. "Regno",
a State, "regnestro", a ruler of a State; "urbestro", the head of a
town, a mayor; "lernejo", a school, "lernejestro", the principal or head
master of a school; "imperio", an empire, "imperiestro", an emperor.

                              VOCABULARY.

   Parizo : Paris.                    vilagxo : village.
   regno : State.                     obe- : obey.
   imperio : empire.                  konfes- : confess, avow,
   polico : police.                         acknowledge, profess
   Kristo : Christ.                         (a religion, etc.).
   Lutero : Luther.                   enir- : enter.
   Kalvino : Calvin.                  ruza : sharp (cunning).
   germano : German.                  suficxa : sufficient.
   franco : Frenchman.                ordinara : ordinary.
   Rusujo : Russia.                   naiva : simple.
   provinco : province.               sagxa : wise.
   religio : religion.                severa : strict, severe.
   regimento : regiment.              justa : just, righteous.
   lokomotivo : engine.               egala : equal.
   logxio : box (opera),              fiera : proud.
         lodge (freemason, etc.).     energia : energetic.

La sxipanoj devas obei la sxipestron. Cxiuj logxantoj de regno estas
regnanoj. Urbanoj estas ordinare pli ruzaj, ol vilagxanoj. La Parizanoj
estas gajaj homoj. Nia urbo havas bonajn policanojn, sed ne suficxe
energian policestron. Luteranoj kaj Kalvinanoj estas Kristanoj. Germanoj
kaj francoj, kiuj logxas en Rusujo, estas Rusujanoj, kvankam ili ne
estas rusoj. Li estas nelerta kaj naiva provincano. La logxantoj de unu
regno estas samregnanoj, la logxantoj de unu urbo estas samurbanoj, la
konfesantoj de unu religio estas samreligianoj. Tiuj, kiuj havas la
samajn ideojn, estas samideanoj.

La regnestro de nia lando estas bona kaj sagxa regxo. Nia provincestro
estas severa, sed justa. Nia regimentestro estas por siaj soldatoj kiel
bona patro. Ili estas egale fieraj, kiel domestrino pri sia domo. Sur la
lokomotivo la lokomotivestro sidis sola. La imperiestro, akompanata de
la imperiestrino, jxus eniris en sian logxion.


                               LESSON 24.

                          Suffixes -ar-, -er-.

The suffix "-ar-" signifies a collection of the persons or things named,
as "arbo", a tree, "arbaro", a wood; "homo", a human being, "homaro",
mankind; "militisto", a soldier (from "milito", war), "militistaro",
an army; "vorto", a word, "vortaro", a dictionary ("vortareto", a
vocabulary); "aro", a flock, "anaro", a company, troop.

"-er-" signifies a particle, or one of things of which the name denotes
a mass, as "greno", corn, "grenero", a grain of corn; "polvo", dust,
"polvero", a speck of dust; "pulvo", gunpowder, "pulvero", a grain
of gunpowder; "hajlo", hail, "hajlero", a hailstone; "negxo", snow,
"negxero", a snowflake; "koto", mud, "kotero", a speck of mud or dirt.


                              VOCABULARY.

   pulvo : gunpowder.                 sxafo : a sheep.
   sxtupo : step, stair.              fajro : fire.
   tegmento : roof.                   met- : put, set.
   herbo : grass.                     pasxt- : feed (cause to feed),
   bruto : brute, beast, head of cattl      pasture.
   lano : wool.                       sekv- : follow.
   persono : person.                  bar- : bar (obstruct).
   floreno : florin.                  batal- : battle, fight.
   sxilingo : shilling.               eksplod- : explode.
   penco : penny.                     brava : brave.
   glaso : a glass (tumbler).         kruta : steep.
   brando : brandy.                   hispana : Spanish.
   tuko : a cloth.                    vasta : vast, spacious.
   telertuketo : serviette.           precipe :  chiefly, particularly.
         [Footnote: See Lesson 45.]   preskaux : almost.
   sxnuro : cord.                     inter : between, among.
   sablo : sand.

Nia lando venkos, cxar nia militistaro estas granda kaj brava. Sur kruta
sxtuparo li levis sin al la tegmento de la domo. Mi ne scias la lingvon
hispanan, sed per helpo de vortaro hispana-germana mi tamen komprenis
iom vian leteron. Sur tiuj cxi vastaj kaj herboricxaj kampoj pasxtas sin
grandaj brutaroj, precipe aroj da bellanaj sxafoj. La vagonaro konsistis
preskaux nur el personvagonoj. Oni metis antaux mi mangxilaron, kiu
konsistis el telero, kulero, trancxilo, forko, glaseto por brando, glaso
por vino kaj telertuketo. Sur la maro staris granda sxipo, kaj inter la
sxnuregaro sidis cxie sxipanoj. Lia sekvantaro staris en la posto de la
logxio. Mallumaj montegaroj baras la vojon.

Floreno, sxilingo kaj penco estas moneroj. Sablero enfalis en mian
okulon. Unu fajrero estas suficxa por eksplodigi pulvon.


                               LESSON 25.

                              Suffix -ul-.

The suffix "-ul-" denotes a person characterised by the quality, etc.,
which the word expresses, as "justa", just, righteous, "justulo", one
who is just; "babili", to chatter, "babilulo", one who chatters, a
babbler; "avara", avaricious, "avarulo", a miser; "kun", with, "kunulo",
a companion.

                              VOCABULARY.

   legendo : legend.                  entrepren- : undertake.
   ombro : shadow.                    propra : own.
   rajto : right, authority.          avara : avaricious.
   profeto : prophet.                 potenca : powerful.
   mensogo : a lie.                   infekta : infectious.
   tagmangx- : dine.                  cxe : at, with.

Malricxa sagxulo tagmangxis cxe avara ricxulo. Malsagxulon cxiu batas.
Li estas mensogisto kaj malnoblulo. Timulo timas ecx sian propran
ombron. Tiu cxi maljunulo tute malsagxigxis kaj infanigxis. Unu
instruitulo entreprenis gravan sciencan laboron. Nur sanktuloj havas la
rajton enveni tien cxi. Li sola estas la grandulo, la potenculo. Gxi ne
estas la legendo pri la belulino Zobeido. Post infekta malsano oni ofte
bruligas la vestojn de la malsanulo. La malbeno de la profeto staras
super la kapo de maldankulo. Post kelkaj minutoj la kuragxulo eliris.
Cxiuj sanktuloj, helpu!


                               LESSON 26.

The following words, which have already been used in the previous
lessons, are always placed before nouns or pronouns, to show the
relation (of position, etc.) between the thing for which the noun stands
and another thing or an action.

   al : to, towards.                  laux : according to.
   apud : beside, near, by.           per : by means of, with.
   da : of (indefinite quantity).     post : after, behind.
   de : of from, by.                  pri : concerning, about.
   el : out of.                       por : for, for the sake of.
   en : in, into, within.             sen : without.
   ekster : outside.                  super : above, over.
   gxis : until, till, as far as.     sur : on, upon.
   inter : between, among.            tra : through.
   kontraux : against, opposite.      trans : across, on the other side.
   kun : (in company) with.           je (has no definite meaning).

(These words are called PREPOSITIONS, which means placed before).

The other simple prepositions are--

   anstataux : instead of.            po : at the rate of.
   antaux : before.                   pro : for (cause), owing to.
   cxe : at, with.                    preter : past, beyond, by.
   cxirkaux : about, around.          spite : in despite of.
   krom : besides, except.            sub : under.
   malgraux : notwithstanding,
         in spite of.

The prepositions "anstataux", "antaux" ("ol"), and "por" are also used
before Infinitive verbs, as "anstataux diri", instead of saying (to
say); "antaux ol paroli", before speaking; "por lerni", in order to
learn.

In Esperanto all the prepositions except "je" have a definite meaning,
and care must be taken to use the one which conveys the exact sense.
The same word cannot be used for "with" in the two sentences "He went
with his father" and "He cut it with a knife," or for "about" in "He
spoke about his child" and "They stood about the stove." In the first
example "with" his father is "kun", in company with, Li iris "kun"
sia patro, and "with" a knife is "per", by means of, Li trancxis gxin
"per" trancxilo. "About," in "about his child," is "pri," concerning,
Li parolis "pri" sia infano, but "about," in "about the stove," is
"cxirkaux," around, Ili staris "cxirkaux" la forno.

When we cannot decide which is the correct preposition to use in any
case, we may use "je," the only preposition which has no special meaning
of its own, or the preposition may be left out altogether, and "n"
added to the noun or pronoun, provided that no want of clearness ensue
(see Lesson 27), as Mi ridas "pro" lia naiveco, or, Mi ridas "je" lia
naiveco, or, Mi ridas lian "naivecon", I laugh at his simplicity.

When we wish to express "motion towards" something, and the preposition
does not of itself express it, "n" is added to the noun or pronoun, as
in the case of adverbs (see Lesson 12), "Li estas en la domo", He is in
the house; but, "Li iras en la domon", He is going into the house.

NOTE.--There are three cases in which the noun or pronoun takes "n".
(i.). When it is the "direct object" of the verb, as "Mi vidis lin",
I saw him. (ii.). To show "direction", as "Li iris en la gxardenon",
He went into the garden. (iii.). When the "preposition" is "left out".
This is usually done in the case of "dates" and expressions signifying
"duration" of time, as "Georgo Vasxington estis naskita la dudek-duan de
Februaro de la jaro mil sepcent tridek du", George Washington was born
the 22nd of February, 1732. "Vi restos tie cxi la tutan vivon (dum la
tuta vivo)", You will remain here your (the) whole life.

All the prepositions whose meaning allows of it can be used as
adjectives, adverbs, etc., by adding the proper endings, as from
"antaux", before, we get "antauxa", former, "antauxe", formerly or
previously, "antauxen", forward.

Prepositions are also joined to other words, and to prefixes or
suffixes, as "antauxdiri", to foretell; "apudmara urbo", a seaside town;
"senigi", to deprive of.

Sometimes the preposition is both prefixed to the verb and used after it
before the noun, as "Li eliris el la domo, kaj eniris en la gxardenon",
He went out of the house, and entered into the garden.


                               LESSON 27.

                                  Al.

"Al" signifies "to" or "towards" a person or place. It is also used
before the noun or pronoun which signifies "person" after such verbs as
"give, tell", etc., which take two objects in different relations to the
verb, as-- Give (to) him the book, "Donu al li la libron." Tell (to)
him the truth, "Diru al li la veron." Write (to) him a letter, "Skribu
al li leteron." In such cases we can say "Pardonu lin", Pardon him, if
the "thing" object is not mentioned, but we cannot say "Pardonu lin la
kulpon", Forgive him his fault; it must be "Pardonu al li la kulpon."
The pronoun with "al" is sometimes used instead of the possessive
(pronoun) adjective "mia", etc., as "Mi trancxis al mi la fingron",
for "Mi trancxis mian fingron", I cut my finger. "Sxi kombis al si la
harojn," instead of "Sxi kombis siajn harojn," She combed her hair.

"Al" is frequently used as a prefix as well as after the verb, as
"aldoni", to add; "alpreni", to adopt; "aligxi", to adhere; "aljugxi",
to award.

                              VOCABULARY.

   sorcxisto : sorcerer.              promes- : promise.
   detrancx- : cut off.               ambaux : both.

Sxi revenis al la palaco de sia patro. Ili ambaux iris al la urbestro.
Cxu mi ne faris al vi bonon? Sxi nenion al ili rakontis. Sxi skribis al
li leteron. Cxiutage li instruas al la homoj ion, kion ili ne scias. Ili
flugis al la suno. Unu fratino promesis al la alia rakonti al sxi, kion
sxi vidis kaj kio la plej multe placxis al sxi en la unua tago. Eble li
al vi pardonos. Sxi ne kredis al siaj propraj oreloj. Li ne sciis, ke
al sxi li devas danki la vivon. Si savis al li la vivon. La sorcxistino
detrancxis al la virineto de maro la langon.


                               LESSON 28.

                               Cxe. Apud.

"Cxe" indicates a certain "place, time", or "point of thought,
discourse", etc., as, "Li estis cxe mia patro", He was with my father,
or at my father's house. "Cxe la momento", At the moment. "Li estis cxe
la pordo", He was at the door, "Cxeesti", To be present.

"Apud" means "close by, beside." It applies to place only, as "La knabo
staris apud la patro", The boy stood by, or beside, the father.

                              VOCABULARY.

   fundo : bottom.                    halt- : stop, halt.
   brako : arm.                       ramp- : creep, crawl.
   torcxo : torch.                    plant- : (to) plant.
   serpento : serpent.                multekosta : precious,
   statuo : statue.                         valuable.
   saliko : willow.                   aux ... aux : either ... or.

Mi logxis cxe sxia patro. Gxi falis sur la fundon de la maro cxe la
rompigxo de la sxipo. Cxe lumo de torcxoj. Brako cxe brako. Kaptis lin
kelka timo cxe la penso. Nenio helpas; oni devas nur kuragxe resti cxe
sia opinio. Sxi ridis cxe lia rakontado. Cxe cxiu vorto, kiun vi diros,
el via busxo eliros aux floro aux multekosta sxtono.

Li haltis apud la pordo. La serpento rampis apud sxiaj piedoj. Kiam
li estis cxe mi, li staris tutan horon apud la fenestro. Mi logxis en
arbo apud via domo. Sxi plantis apud la statuo roza-rugxan salikon. La
apudvojaj arboj.


                               LESSON 29.

                                  En.

"En" means "in, inside;" when "n" is added to the noun which it
precedes, it means "into", as "Kie vi estas? Mi estas en la domo. Kien
vi iras? Mi iras en la gxardenon." Where are you? I am in the house.
Where are you going? I am going into the garden. "Malamiko venis en nian
landon", An enemy came into our country.

                              VOCABULARY.

   Hispanujo : Spain.                 muel- : grind.
   humoro : humour, temper.           turn- : turn.
   paco : peace.                      divid- : divide.
   pinglo : pin.                      do : then.
   nasko-tago : birthday.             gxuste : exactly, just.
   faruno : flour.                    kvazaux : as if.
   parto : part.

La birdo flugas en la cxambro ( = gxi estas en la cxambro, kaj flugas en
gxi). La birdo flugas en la cxambron ( = gxi estas ekster la cxambro,
kaj flugas nun en gxin). Mi vojagxas en Hispanujo. Mi vojagxas en
Hispanujon. Kion do fari en tia okazo? Mi estas en bona humoro. Li
murmuretis al la regxino en la orelon. En sekvo de tiu cxi okazo. Mi
preferus resti en paco tie cxi. Sxia naskotago estis gxuste en la mezo
de vintro. Li ekrigardis en la okulojn de la infano. Li estis bela
granda viro en la agxo de kvardek jaroj. En la dauxro de mia tuta vivo.
En la fino de la jaro. Mano en mano. Enirinte en la vagonon, sxi sidis
kvazaux sur pingloj. La greno mueligxas en farunon. Aleksandro turnigxis
en polvon. Li dividis la pomon en du partojn.


                               LESSON 30.

                           Inter. Ekster. El.

"Inter" means "between, among", or "amongst." It is largely used as a
prefix, as "interparoli", to converse; "internacia", international;
"interkonsento", agreement; "sin intermeti", to interfere.


"Ekster" means "out of, outside", as "ekster dangxero", out of danger.
It is used as a prefix, as "eksterordinara", extraordinary.

"El" means "out of". It applies (i.) to "place", signifying motion from,
as, "Mi eliris el la domo", I went out of the house. (ii.). "Chosen from
among", as, "Unu el miaj infanoj", One of (from among) my children.
(iii.). "Made out of", as, "Tiu cxi sxtofo estas farita el lano", This
cloth is made (out) of wool. "El" is used as a prefix, and means "out,
outright", or "thoroughly", as, "Elfosi", to dig out; "Ellerni", to
learn thoroughly.

                              VOCABULARY.

   kolono : column, pillar.           krono : crown.
   marmoro : marble.                  uzo : use.
   figuro : figure.                   okazo : occasion.
   muro : wall.                       alfabeto : alphabet.
   kanapo : sofa.                     divid- : divide (something).
   arto : art.                        produkt- : produce.
   viveco : liveliness.               interne : inside.

Inter Rusujo kaj Francujo estas Germanujo. Ili dividis inter si dekdu
pomojn. Inter la deka kaj dekunua horo matene. Inter la kolonoj staris
marmoraj figuroj. Apud la muro inter la fenestroj staris kanapo. Longe
ili parolis inter si. Cxe tiu cxi malsano unu horo povas decidi inter
vivo kaj morto. En la intertempo inter la paroloj oni produktas artajn
fajrojn.

Mi staras ekster la domo, kaj li estas interne. Li estas ekster la
pordo. Nun ni estas ekster dangxero. Li logxas ekster la urbo. Starante
ekstere, li povis vidi nur la eksteran flankon de nia domo. Li montris
eksteren en la mallumon. Mi lasis lin ekstere. La ekstero de tiu cxi
homo estas pli bona, ol lia interno.

Li eliris el la urbo. Li estas jxus reveninta el la eksterlando. Kun
eksterordinara viveco sxi elsaltis el la vagono. Sxi metis al sxi
kronon el blankaj lilioj sur la harojn. Li faris uzon el la okazo. Tiuj
cxi nestoj estas farataj tute el tero. Sxi estis la plej kuragxa el
cxiuj. Jen vi elkreskis! Li eliris el la dormocxambro, kaj eniris en la
mangxocxambron. La esperanta alfabeto konsistas el dudek ok literoj.


                               LESSON 31.

                            Sur. Super. Sub.

"Sur" means "on, upon" (touching). "Li sidas sur la kanapo", He is
sitting on the sofa. Followed by the accusative (with "n") it means "on
to", as "Sidigxu sur la kanapon", Sit down on the sofa. "Influi sur la
karakteron", To have influence on the character.

"Super" means "over, above" (not touching). "Super la maro flugis la
nuboj", Over the sea floated the clouds. Followed by the accusative it
shows motion over and above a thing, as "Li jxetis sxtonon super la
muron", He threw a stone over the wall.

"Sub" means "under, underneath". "La hundo kusxis sub la tablo", The
dog lay under the table. With the accusative "sub" shows motion to and
beneath, as "La hundo kuris sub la tablon", The dog ran under the table.

                              VOCABULARY.

   aero : air.                        suprajxo : surface.
   sono : sound.                      sxultro : shoulder.
   benko : bench.                     ferdeko : deck.
   kato : cat.                        balanc- : swing (something).
   lito : bed.                        frap- : strike, slap.
   frukto : fruit.                    influ- : have influence on.
   genuo : knee.                      prem- : press.
   muso : mouse.                      nagx- : swim.
   muziko : music.                    forestanta : absent.
   ponto : bridge.                    nobla : noble (quality).
   sofo : sofa.                       alta : high.

Mi sidas sur segxo kaj tenas la piedojn sur benketo. Li revenis kun kato
sur la brako. Mi metis la manon sur la tablon. Li falis sur la genuojn.
Ne iru sur la ponton. Li jxetis sin malespere sur segxon. Li frapis lin
sur la sxultron, kaj premis lin malsupren sur la sofon. Mi sidigis min
sur la lokon de la forestanta hejtisto. La fruktoplantado devas influi
noblige sur tiujn, kiuj sia okupas je gxi.

Super la tero sin trovas aero. Liaj pensoj alte levigxis super la
nubojn. Sxi ricevis la permeson sin levi super la suprajxon de la maro.
Ili povis sin levi sur la altajn montojn alte super la nubojn. Li staras
supre sur la monto kaj rigardas malsupren sur la kampon. Sxi sidis sur
la akvo kaj balancigxis supren kaj malsupren.

El sub la kanapo la muso kuris sub la liton, kaj nun gxi kuras sub la
lito. Sxi ofte devis nagxi sub la akvon. Sub la sonoj de muziko ili
dancis sur la ferdeko. Ekfloris sub sxia rigardo la blankaj lilioj. Sxi
subigxis sub la akvon. Sxi suprennagxis cxe la subiro de la suno.


                               LESSON 32.

                          Tra. Trans. Preter.

"Tra" means "through", as "Tra la truo", Through the hole. "Tra la
mondo", Through the world.

"Trans" means "at the other side, across", as "Li logxas trans la
rivero", He lives on the other side of the river. With the accusative it
means "to the other side", as "Li nagxis trans la riveron", He swam to
the other side of (across) the river.


"Preter" means "past, by", or "beyond;" it conveys the idea of coming
up from behind and passing on in front, as "Mi pasis preter via frato",
or "Mi preterpasis vian fraton", I passed your brother. The difference
between "tra", "trans", and "preter" is clearly shown by the sentence
"Trapasinte la arbaron, li preterpasis la pregxejon kaj tiam transpasis
la riveron per la ponto", Having passed through the wood, he passed by
the church, and then passed over the river by the bridge.

                              VOCABULARY.

   kameno : hearth, fireside.         momento : moment.
   poto : pot.                        abato : abbot.
   kaldrono : cauldron, kettle.       penetr- : penetrate.
   vaporo : steam, vapour.            bol- : boil (as water boils).
   hirundo : swallow.                 turn- : turn (a thing or oneself).
   tunelo : tunnel.                   largxa : wide, broad.
   oceano : ocean.

Li estas tiel dika, ke li ne povas trairi tra nia mallargxa pordo.
Sxi rigardis supren tra la mallume-blua akvo. Tra la palrugxa aero
lumis la stelo de la vespero. La sonado de la sonoriloj trapenetras
malsupren al sxi. Ili traglitas inter la brancxoj. Sur la kameno inter
du potoj staras fera kaldrono; el la kaldrono, en kiu sin trovas (or
"trovigxas") bolanta akvo, eliras vaporo; tra la fenestro, kiu sin
trovas (or "trovigxas") apud la pordo, la vaporo iras sur la korton.

La hirundo flugis trans la riveron, cxar trans la rivero sin trovis
(or "trovigxis") aliaj hirundoj. Ili povas flugi sur sxipoj trans la
maron. "Kial Hanibalo iris trans la Alpojn? Cxar tiam la tunelo ne
estis ankoraux preter." Estas neeble, ke ili estu transirintaj trans la
oceanon. Cxio transturnigxis la fundo supren.

Ni pasis preter la stacio. En tiu cxi momento preteriras la abato.
Preterirante, mi demandis lin, cxu jam estas la dekdua horo. La muelilo
ne povas mueli per akvo preterfluinta.


                               LESSON 33.

                             Antaux. Post.

"Antaux" means "before" (time), "Ni revenos antaux Mardo", We shall
return before Tuesday, "in front of" (place), "Antaux la domo", Before
the house. Before verbs "antaux ol" is used, as "Lavu vin, antaux ol
mangxi", Wash (yourself) before eating.

"Post" means "after" (time), "behind" (place).

Care must be taken in using "antaux" and "post" to arrange the sentence
so that there can be no doubt as to whether time or place is referred
to. "He came before his father," in place or position, "i.e.", in front
of his father, is "Li venis antaux sia patro", but if "before in time"
is meant, it must be "Li venis antaux ol lia patro" ("venis"). "Li venis
post sia patro" means He came behind his father; if we mean "after his
father came" we may use "kiam", and say "Li venis post, kiam lia patro
venis".

To express "time past," "ago," "antaux" is used, as "Antaux tri tagoj",
Three days ago. "Antaux longe", A long time ago. "Antaux nelonge", Not
long ago.

To express "in" a time to come "post" is used, as I will come in three
days, "Mi venos post tri tagoj". "Post nelonge", In a short time.

                              VOCABULARY.

   pregxejo : church (place of        vek- : waken (someone).
         prayer).                     bala- : sweep.
   ordo : order.                      rauxka : hoarse.
   ricxeco : wealth.                  avida : eager, greedy.
   pasxo : step.                      ofte : often.
   pagxo : page.                      publike : publicly.

Antaux ili staris pregxejo. Antaux tiuj homoj estas inde paroli. Ofte
en la nokto sxi staris antaux la fenestro. Mi estas peka antaux vi.
Antaux unu horo. Antaux mallonge li vekigxis tre rauxka. Antaux nelonge
oni vendis la domon publike. Ne iru, antaux ol vi scias, ke cxio estas
en ordo. Mi devos lasi ilin elbalai la cxambron, antaux ol ni komencos
danci. Mi estis tie en la antauxa jaro. Antauxe mi neniam pensis pri
ricxeco. Estis al sxi, kiel la sorcxistino antauxdiris.

Li restis post la pordo. Iom post iom. Sxi komencis avide legi pagxon
post pagxo. Sxi rigardis post lin kun rideto. Post kelkaj minutoj
levigxis la suno. Sxi jxetis siajn brakojn posten kaj antauxen. Ni
restos kelkajn semajnojn en Parizo; poste ni vojagxos en Germanujon.


                               LESSON 34.

                          Dum. Gxis. Cxirkaux.

"Dum" means "during", as "Dum mia tuta vivo", During my whole life. It
is not much used as a preposition, that is, before a noun, "en la dauxro
de" being better, as "En la dauxro de mia tuta vivo", In (the duration
of) my whole life; or the preposition is omitted altogether, as "La
tutan tagon mi laboradis", I used to work all day long. "Dum", meaning
"while, whilst", is often used at the beginning of a sentence. "Dume"
means meanwhile, or, in the meantime.

"Gxis" means "till, until, up to, as far as". "Atendu gxis Sabato", Wait
until Saturday. "Iru gxis la rivero", Go as far as the river.

"Cxirkaux" means "about" or "around, somewhere near" (more or less).
"Ili ludis cxirkaux la arbo", They played around the tree. "Cxirkaux
Majo ni foriros", About May we shall go away.

                              VOCABULARY.

   koncerto : concert.                vitro : glass (material).
   flanko : side.                     globo : globe.
   sorto : fate.                      kolekt- : collect.
   radio : ray.                       prepar- : prepare.
   kupolo : cupola, dome.             pes- : weigh (something).
   rublo : rouble.                    ekzist- : exist.
   etagxo : story (of building).      pere- : perish.
   doloro : pain, ache.               proksime : near to.

Dum la tuta tago (aux, la tutan tagon) li restis sola. Dum (aux, en la
dauxro de) kelkaj monatoj, sxi ne eliradis el sia cxambro. Li dormis dum
la tuta koncerto (aux, la tutan koncerton). Dum dauxris la preparoj,
li estis gasto cxe la regxo. Dum li veturas sur la vojo al Grenada, en
Santa Fe estas decidata lia sorto.

Ili laboradis gxis profunda nokto. La telero de la pesilo mallevigxis
gxis la tero. Gxiaj radioj sin levadis gxis la kupolo. Pruntu al mi dek
rublojn gxis morgaux. Li laboradis de frua mateno gxis malfrua nokto. Li
batalos gxis la fino mem. Ni levadis nin cxiam pli kaj pli alte gxis la
kvara etagxo. Gxi ekzistos gxis la mondo pereos.

La regxo venis cxirkaux tagmezo en la vilagxon Reading. Cxirkaux la
mateno la ventego finigxis. Estos suficxe cxirkaux dek metroj. Cxiuj
kolektigxis cxirkaux la vitra globo. Oni povas rigardi tre malproksime
cxirkauxe. Cxirkauxe nagxis grandaj montoj de glacio. Li rigardis
cxirkauxen sur cxiuj flankoj.


                               LESSON 35.

                                De. Da.


"De" means "of", "from", or "by"; it denotes (i.) "possession", as "La
cxapelo de la patro", The father's hat; (ii.), "the agent of an action",
as "La letero estis skribata de Johano", The letter was written by John;
(iii.), "cause, Li mortis de febro", He died of fever; (iv.), "starting
point, from, since", as "De tiu tempo neniu lin vidis", (Starting) from
(since) that time nobody has seen him; "Li venis de Parizo", He came
from Paris.

"Da" means "of"; it is used after words signifying quantity, when the
noun following has a "general", not a "particular" sense, as "Dekduo
da kuleroj", A dozen spoons; "Funto da teo", A pound of tea; "Peco da
pano", A piece of bread; but if some particular tea, bread, etc., is
specified, "de" must be used, as "Funto de la teo", A pound of the tea;
"Peco de la pano", A piece of the bread. "La" cannot be used after "da."

                              VOCABULARY.

   placo : place, square.             peco : piece.
   velo : sail.                       sumo : sum.
   drapo : cloth.                     inko : ink.
   ovo : egg.                         najbaro : neighbour.
   kilometro : kilometre.             mezuro : measure,
   bordo : shore.                     sufer- : suffer.
   amaso : crowd.                     signif- : mean, signify.
   auxtuno : autumn.                  nigra : black.
   turo : tower.                      plena : full.
   cxevalo : horse.

La lumo de la luno. En la mezo de la placo staris domo. Li povis havi
la agxon de dekses jaroj. La tempo de ilia vivo estas ankoraux pli
mallonga, ol de nia. Ili sin levis de apud la tablo. Mi pensis, ke vi
de tie jam ne revenos. La sxipanoj demetis la velojn. Li deiris de la
cxevalo.

Glaso de vino estas glaso, en kiu antauxe sin trovis vino, aux kiun oni
uzas por vino; glaso da vino estas glaso plena je vino. Alportu al mi
metron da nigra drapo. (Metro de drapo signifus metron, kiu kusxis sur
drapo, aux kiu estas uzata por drapo). Mi acxetis dekon da ovoj. Tiu
cxi rivero havas ducent kilometrojn da longo. Sur la bordo de la maro
staris amaso da homoj. Multaj birdoj flugas en la auxtuno en pli varmajn
landojn. Sur la arbo sin trovis multe (aux multo) da birdoj. Kelkaj
homoj sentas sin la plej felicxaj, kiam ili vidas la suferojn de siaj
najbaroj. En la cxambro sidis nur kelke da homoj. "Da" post ia vorto
montras, ke tiu cxi vorto havas signifon de mezuro.

Gxi estas bela peco da sxtofo. Sur la teleron li metis milojn da
pecoj da argxento. La lumoj brilas kiel centoj da steloj. Knabo
acxetis boteleton da inko. Ili konstruas turetojn enhavantajn multe da
cxambretoj. Li donis al ili grandan sumon da mono.


                               LESSON 36.

                             Per. Kun. Sen.

"Per" and "kun" represent different uses of our word "with," so care
must be taken to use the correct word.

"Per" signifies "by means of"; it denotes the "instrument" by means of
which something is done, as "Per hakilo ni hakas", By means of an axe we
chop.

"Kun" means "in company with, accompanying". "Li iros kun mi", He will
go with me.

"Sen" means "without" as "Teo sen sukero", Tea without sugar. It is used
as a prefix to denote absence of something, as "sen-utila", without
use, useless (compare with "mal", which denotes the exact opposite;
"malutila" means "harmful, noxious").

                              VOCABULARY.

   envio : envy.                      folio : leaf.
   sxauxmo : foam, froth.             fadeno : thread.
   fisxo : fish.                      lud- : play.
   vosto : tail.                      pentr- : paint.
   pentrajxo : painting.              flar- : smell (something).
   regxido : prince (king's son).     pel- : drive.
   princo : prince.                   kovr- : cover.
   ondo : wave.                       cxes- : cease.
   membro : member.                   mov- : move (something).
   tataro : Tartar.                   kune : together.

Mi mangxas per la busxo, kaj flaras per la nazo. Sxi surpasxis per piedo
sur la serpenton. Gxi enkovris la belegan lilion per blanka sxauxmo. La
korpo finigxis per fisxa vosto. Cxiuj muroj estas ornamitaj per grandaj
pentrajxoj. Per tie cxi, kaj ne per alia vojo, la sxtelisto forkuris.
Per kia maniero oni povas veni en la landon de oro? Per tia maniero. Per
unu vorto. La stelo Venus ekbrulis per envio.

Sxi volis ludi kun ili, sed kun teruro ili forkuris. Kun kia atento
sxi auxskultis tiujn cxi rakontojn! La plej bela el ili estis la juna
regxido kun la grandaj nigraj okuloj. Tien cxi alnagxis la virineto de
maro kun la bela princo. Kun plezuro. Kun cxiu jaro la nombro de la
membroj rapide kreskis.

La tataro restis sen bona cxevalo kaj sen mangxo. Li preskaux sen vivo
estis pelata de la ondoj. Ili teksis per cxiuj fortoj, sed sen fadenoj.
Li senvorte obeis. La folioj sin movis (or "movigxis") sencxese. Li
kreis sennombrajn birdojn.


                               LESSON 37.

                               Por. Pro.

"Por" means "for, in order to, for the purpose of, for the benefit of",
as "Li acxetis inkon por skribi", He bought ink in order to write. Por
is one of the three prepositions used before verbs in the Infinitive.

"Pro" means "for, because of, on account of, for the sake of" (cause),
as "Li demandis sxin, pro kio sxi ploras", He asked her, for what
(reason or cause) she weeps.

"Por" looks "forward" to the aim or purpose of the action, to that which
comes after the action, while "pro" looks "back" to what came before
the action and caused it to be done, as "Mi mangxas" pro "malsato" por
"vivi", I eat because of hunger in order to live.


                              VOCABULARY.

   ofico : office.                    vend- : sell.
   mastro : master.                   konvink- : convince.
   kafo : coffee.                     kontenta : content, pleased.
   bieno : property.                  sata : satiated.
   kauxzo : cause.

Li sin kuracis por resanigxi. Sxi havis multege por rakonti. Li iris
en la pregxejon, por fari la konfeson. Por iel pasigi la tempon. Neniu
pli bone tauxgas por sia ofico, ol li. Li uzis cxiajn siajn fortojn por
kontentigi sian mastron. Por mi estas tute egale, kie ajn mi logxas.
Prenu (la pagon) por la kafo.

Li mortis pro (aux, de) malsato. Mi havis tre bonan bienon, kiu
estis vendita pro sxuldoj. Pro la cxielo, ne faru tion cxi. Li estis
konvinkita, ke li pro si ne devas timi. Pro tio cxi Venus lumas pli
forte, ol multaj aliaj steloj. Cxu pro tio, aux cxu pro ia alia kauxzo,
mi ne scias.


                               LESSON 38.

                               Pri. Laux.

"Pri" means "concerning, in regard to, about", as "Ni parolis pri nia
amiko", We spoke about or concerning our friend.

"Pripensi", to think about, to consider. "Priparoli", to speak about.
"Priskribi", to describe.

"Laux" means "according to, in accordance with", as "Laux mia opinio",
According to (or, in) my opinion.

"Lauxlonge", lengthways.

                              VOCABULARY.

   konko : shell                      afero : affair, matter.
   komando : command.                 honesteco : honesty.
   eksterajxo : exterior.             konvena : suitable, proper,
   portreto : portrait.                     respectable.
   boneco : goodness.                 songx- : dream.
   fojo : time.                       sxajn- : seem, appear.

Sxi volis kredi, ke la hebreo parolas pri iu alia. Nun la virino havas
cxion, sxi pri nenio povas peti. Pri tio cxi ne pensu. Tion oni vere
ne povas diri pri vi. Estis ankoraux multaj aferoj, pri kiuj ili volis
scii. Li ne povis ecx songxi pri sxi. Sxi demandadis pri tio la maljunan
avinon.

Mi restas tie cxi laux la ordono de mia estro. Li ekiris laux tiu
cxi rivero. Ili havis la permeson supreniri cxiufoje laux sia volo.
Sxi povis laux sia placxo fosi kaj planti. La konkoj sin fermas kaj
malfermas laux la fluo de la akvo. Laux sia eksterajxo li sxajnis
konvena homo. Laux la komando "tri" vi ekpafos sur la arbon. La pli
juna filino estis la plena portreto de sia patro laux sia boneco kaj
honesteco.


                               LESSON 39.

                       Kontraux. Anstataux. Krom.

"Kontraux" means "against, opposite", or "in opposition to" as "Li
kuragxe batalis kune kun ni kontraux niaj malamikoj", He courageously
fought with us against our enemies. It is also used in the sense
of "overlooking", as "La fenestro kontraux la strato", The window
overlooking the street; and of "facing", as "Vizagxo kontraux vizagxo",
Face to face. "Kontrauxdiri", to contradict.

"Anstataux" means "instead of, in the place" of, as "Mi iris Londonon
anstataux Parizon", I went to London instead of to Paris. "Mi iris
hieraux anstataux morgaux", I went yesterday instead of to-morrow.
"Anstataux piediri, li veturis", Instead of going on foot, he drove.
"Anstatauxi", to take (or, be in) the place of; "anstatauxigi", to put
in the place of, to replace (by).

"Krom" means "not including, in addition to, besides", as "En la cxambro
estis neniu krom li", In the room there was nobody except him. "La knabo
estas granda, kaj krom tio, li estas bona". The boy is tall, and besides
that, he is good.


                              VOCABULARY.

   rimedo : a means, remedy.          sukero : sugar.
   kutimo : custom.                   kremo : cream.
   profesoro : professor,             prepozicio : preposition.
   reflektoro : reflector.            vokalo : vowel.
   fiancxo : betrothed.               abomeno : disgust.
   flanko : side.                     ordinara : ordinary.
   teo : tea.

Vi havas rimedojn kontraux cxiuj malsanoj. Kion povas fari li sola
kontraux cent homoj? Kontraux sia kutimo, la profesoro nenion diris. Gxi
flugis kontraux la reflektoron. Kontraux sia propra volo sxi tion cxi
konfesis. Li eksentis ian abomenon kontraux si. La kontrauxa flanko. Ili
sidigxis unu kontraux la alia. Sxi estis maljusta kontraux li. Kontraux
la ordinaro, la nombro de la dancantoj estis granda.

Anstataux li, oni sendis lian fraton. Anstataux eliri, li restis en la
domo. Okulo anstataux okulo, kaj dento anstataux dento. Anstataux kafo
li donis al mi teon kun sukero sed sen kremo. Anstataux "la" oni povas
ankaux diri "l'" (sed nur post prepozicio, kiu finigxas per vokalo).

En la salono staris neniu krom li kaj lia fiancxino. Krom la malplena
teksilo nenio estis. Krom ni mem, ni havis tre malmulte por enporti. Sxi
volis havi, krom la rugxaj floroj, nur unu belan statuon. Cxiuj dormis,
krom la direktilisto apud sia direktilo. Krom la membroj alveturas multe
da gastoj.


                               LESSON 40.

                        Malgraux. Spite. Po. Je.

"Malgraux" means "in spite of", "notwithstanding", as "Li sukcesis
malgraux cxio", He succeeded in spite of everything.

"Spite" is a stronger expression than "malgraux"; it means in defiance
of all opposition, despite, as "Li faris tion, spite la malpermeso", He
did that, in spite of being forbidden.


"Po" means "at the rate of", as "Mi acxetis dekduon da ovoj po unu
penco", I bought a dozen eggs at (the rate of) a penny (each).
"Poduone", by halves. "Po grande", wholesale; "po malgrande", retail.

As already said (see Lesson 26), "je" is the only preposition which has
no meaning of its own. It is used when a preposition is needed, and none
of the others properly expresses the idea, as "La krucxo estas plena je"
(or, "de") "akvo", The jug is full of water. "Mi enuas je la hejmo", I
am tired of home.

                              VOCABULARY.

   mastrumajxo : household affairs.   honoro : honour.
   fungo : mushroom.                  libereco : freedom, liberty.
   senco : sense, meaning.            kulpo : fault.
   regulo : rule.                     simila : similar, like.
   klareco : clearness.               komuna : common to.
   akuzativo : accusative.            kri- : cry.
   nobeleco : nobility (of birth).    sopir- : sigh for, long for.
                                      ekzemple : for example.

Li multe laboris, sed malgraux cxio, li ne sukcesis. Estis ankoraux
suficxe varme, malgraux ke la suno staris malalte. Ili estos severe
punataj, se ili, malgraux la malpermeso, pekos kontraux la libereco de
la vojo. Spite cxiuj miaj penoj por malhelpi lin, li foriris.

Por miaj kvar infanoj mi acxetis dek du pomojn, kaj al cxiu el la
infanoj mi donis po tri pomoj. Ili povas kosti po tri gxis kvin
sxilingoj. Tiu cxi libro havas sesdek pagxojn; tial se mi legos en cxiu
tago po dekkvin pagxoj, mi finos la tutan libron en kvar tagoj. Mi
acxetis kvar librojn po ses pencoj.

Ni estis nur okupitaj je kelkaj mastrumajxoj. La konstruo estas simila
je fungo. Ili forkuris, kiam la virino ekkriis je ili. Je la vespero la
cxielo kovrigxis je nuboj. El timo je Karagara mi forkuris. Sxi estis
tre fiera je sia nobeleco. La hundo sincere malgxojis je li. Neniu el
ili estis tiel plena je deziroj, kiel la plej juna knabino. Je vorto de
honoro.

                                  40A.

Se ni bezonas uzi prepozicion, kaj la senco ne montras al ni, kian
prepozicion uzi, tiam ni povas uzi la komunan prepozicion "je." Sed
estas bone uzadi la vorton "je" kiel eble pli malofte. Anstataux la
vorto "je" ni povas ankaux uzi akuzativon sen prepozicio.--Mi ridas
je lia naiveco (aux, mi ridas pro lia naiveco; aux mi ridas lian
naivecon).--Je la lasta fojo mi vidas lin cxe vi (aux, la lastan
fojon).--Mi veturis du tagojn kaj unu nokton.--Mi sopiras je mia perdita
felicxo (aux, mian perditan felicxon).--El la dirita regulo sekvas, ke
se ni pri ia verbo ne scias, cxu gxi postulas post si la akuzativon
(t.e.=tio estas, cxu gxi estas aktiva) aux ne, ni povas cxiam uzi la
akuzativon. Ekzemple, ni povas diri "obei al la patro" kaj "obei la
patron" (anstataux, "obei je la patro"). Sed ni ne uzas la akuzativon
tiam, kiam la klareco de la senco tion cxi malpermesas; ekzemple: ni
povas diri "pardoni al la malamiko" kaj "pardoni la malamikon," sed ni
devas diri cxiam "pardoni al la malamiko lian kulpon."


                               LESSON 41.

                         Suffixes -ajx-, -ec-.

"-ajx-" denotes a "thing" (i.) "made from" or "of" the substance named,
or (ii.) having the "quality" or "character" named, or (iii.) "resulting
from" the action expressed by the word to which it is added, as "Ovo",
an egg, "ovajxo", something made of eggs, an omelette; "Mirinda",
wonderful, "mirindajxo", a wonderful thing, a wonder; "Trovi", to find,
"trovajxo" (or, "trovitajxo"), a thing found.


"-ec-" denotes "quality"; it forms the name of a quality; as, "Bona",
good; "boneco", goodness. "Ricxa", rich; "ricxeco", richness. "Akurata",
accurate, prompt; "akurateco", accuracy. "Mola", soft; "molajxo", a soft
thing; "moleco", softness. "Amiko", a friend; "amikajxo", a friendly
act; "amikeco", friendliness, friendship. "Eco", quality.

                              VOCABULARY.

   kuko : cake.                       lago : lake.
   ligno : wood (substance).          objekto : object, thing.
   alkoholo : alcohol.                tren- : drag.
   araneo : spider.                   fotograf- : photograph.
   ceremonio : ceremony.              konfit- : preserve with sugar.
   heroo : hero.                      pak- : pack.
   frandajxo : a dainty.              la  ceteraj : the rest, remainder.
   acido : acid.                      mirinda : wonderful.
   vinagro : vinegar.                 peza : heavy.
   sulfuro : sulphur.                 oportuna : convenient.
   azotacido : nitric acid.

La fotografisto fotografis min, kaj mi sendis mian fotografajxon al mia
patro. Vi parolas sensencajxon, mia amiko. Mi trinkis teon kun kuko kaj
konfitajxo. Akvo estas fluidajxo. Mi ne volis trinki la vinon, cxar gxi
enhavis en si ian malklarajxon. Sur la tablo staris diversaj sukerajxoj.
Mi mangxis bongustan ovajxon. Kiam mi ien veturas, mi neniam prenas
kun mi multon da pakajxo. Glaciajxo estas dolcxa glaciigita frandajxo.
La tuta suprajxo de la lago estis kovrita per nagxantaj folioj kaj
diversaj aliaj kreskajxoj. La lignisto vendas lignon, kaj la lignajxisto
faras tablojn, segxojn kaj aliajn lignajn objektojn. Mi uzas nenian
alkoholajxon. Lia maljuna patrino kondukis la mastrajxon de la domo.
"Malbonan eksterajxon li havis," respondis la hebreo. Sxi pripensis la
faritajxojn de la tago pasinta. Gxi estas tiel malpeza, kiel araneajxo.
La trenajxo de la vesto estis longa. Ili sin movas, kiel vivaj estajxoj.


Li amas tiun cxi knabinon pro sxia beleco kaj boneco. Lia heroeco tre
placxis al mi. Mi vivas kun ili en granda amikeco. Ni estas ja en la
proksimeco de la rivero. Tio cxi estas la plej grava eco. Kortega
ceremonio postulas maloportunecon. La ricxeco de tiu cxi homo estas
granda, sed lia malsagxeco estas ankoraux pli granda.

En tiuj cxi boteletoj sin trovas (trovigxas) diversaj acidoj, vinagro,
sulfuracido, azotacido kaj aliaj. La acideco de tiu cxi vinagro estas
tre malforta. Via vino estas nur ia abomena acidajxo. Tiu cxi granda
altajxo ne estas natura monto. La alteco de tiu monto ne, estas tre
granda.


                               LESSON 42.

                      Suffixes -ej-, -uj-, -ing-.

The suffix "-ej-" denotes a "place specially used" for a certain
purpose, as "Tombo", a tomb; "tombejo", a cemetery. "Cxevalo", a horse;
"cxevalejo", a stable. "Mallibera," captive "malliberejo", a prison.

"-uj-" denotes that which "contains" or "produces", or "bears" (as
countries, fruit-trees, receptacles, etc.), as "Anglo", an Englishman:
"Anglujo", England. "Hispano", a Spaniard; "Hispanujo" Spain ("lando"
is also used, as "Skotlando"). "Pomo", an apple; "pomujo", an apple
tree ("arbo" is also used, as "pomarbo"). "Abelo", a bee; "abelujo", a
beehive. "Sukerujo", a sugar-basin; "Ujo", a receptacle.

"-ing-" signifies a "holder, case", or "sheath" for one thing, as
"Fingro", a finger; "fingringo", a thimble. "Piedo", a foot; "piedingo",
a stirrup. "Glavo", a sword; "glavingo", a sword-sheath. "Ingo", a
sheath.

                              VOCABULARY.

   skatolo : box.                     objekto : object, thing.
   hufo : hoof.                       glavo : sword,
   pantalono : trousers.              konsil- : counsel, advise.
   cigaro : cigar.                    sxvit- : sweat, perspire.
   tubo : tube.                       sorb- : absorb.
   monahxo : monk.                    ban- : bathe (oneself or another).
   magazeno : magazine, warehouse.

La domo, en kiu oni lernas, estas lernejo, kaj la domo, en kiu oni
pregxas, estas pregxejo. La kuiristo sidas en la kuirejo. La kuracisto
konsilas al mi iri en sxvitbanejon. La cxevalo metis unu hufon sur
serpentejon. La virino promenadis tra belegaj arbaroj kaj herbejoj. Li
venis en sian logxejon. Li haltis apud la pordego de la monahxejo.

La rusoj logxas en Rusujo, kaj la germanoj en Germanujo. Mia skribilaro
konsistas el inkujo, sablujo, kelke da plumoj, krajono, kaj inksorbilo.
En la posxo de mia pantalono mi portas monujon, kaj en la posxo de mia
surtuto mi portas paperujon; pli grandan paperujon mi portas sub la
brako. Metu sur la tablon la sukerujon, la teujon, kaj la tekrucxon.

Magazeno, en kiu oni vendas cigarojn, aux cxambro, en kiu oni tenas
cigarojn, estas cigarejo; skatoleto aux alia objekto, en kiu oni tenas
cigarojn, estas cigarujo; tubeto, en kiun oni metas cigaron, kiam oni
gxin fumas, estas cigaringo. Skatoleto, en kiu oni tenas plumojn, estas
plumujo, kaj bastoneto, sur kiu oni tenas plumon por skribadi, estas
plumingo. En la kandelingo sidis brulanta kandelo.


                               LESSON 43.

                   Ge-, bo-, -id-, pra-, -cxj-, -nj-.

The prefix "ge-" signifies "both sexes taken together", as "gepatroj",
parents. "Gefratoj", brothers and sisters. "Geregxoj", king and queen
(the word formed is, of course, always plural).

The prefix "bo-" denotes "relationship by marriage", as "bopatro",
father-in-law; "bofilo", son-in-law.

The suffix "-id-" signifies the "offspring" or "descendant", as "Regxo"
a king; "regxido", a king's son, a prince. "Kato", a cat; "katido", a
kitten. "Sxafo", a sheep; "sxafido", a lamb.

The prefix "pra-" means "of generations ago, great-, grand-", as,
"avo", grandfather; "pra-avo", great-grand-father. It is also used
for descendants, as "pra-nepo", great-grandson. "Praa", primitive or
primeval.

The suffix "-cxj-" is added to men's names and "-nj-" to women's names
to form "pet names", part of the name being left out, as "Petro", Peter
; "Pecxjo", Pete. "Klaro", Clara; "Klanjo", Clarrie. "Pacxjo" (from
"patro"), papa; "panjo", mamma.

                              VOCABULARY.

   altaro : altar.                    gratul- : congratulate.
   parenco : relation.                deven- : originate, descend from.
   doktoro : doctor (law, etc.).      adres- : address (a letter).
   stato : state, condition.          telegraf- : telegraph.
   koko : cock.

Patro kaj patrino kune estas nomataj gepatroj. Petro, Anno, kaj
Elizabeto estas miaj gefratoj. Gesinjoroj N. hodiaux vespere venos al
ni. La gefiancxoj staris apud la altaro. Mi gratulis telegrafe la junajn
geedzojn. La geregxoj forveturis Kordovon. Sxi edzinigxis kun sia kuzo,
kvankam sxiaj gepatroj volis sxin edzinigi kun alia persono.

La patro de mia edzino estas mia bopatro, mi estas lia bofilo, kaj mia
patro estas la bopatro de mia edzino. Cxiuj parencoj de mia edzino estas
miaj boparencoj, sekve sxia frato estas mia bofrato, sxia fratino estas
mia bofratino; mia frato kaj fratino (gefratoj) estas la bogefratoj de
mia edzino. La edzino de mia nevo, kaj la nevino de mia edzino estas
miaj bonevinoj. Virino, kiu kuracas, estas kuracistino; edzino de
kuracisto estas kuracistedzino. La doktoredzino A. vizitis hodiaux la
gedoktorojn P. Li ne estas lavisto, li estas lavistinedzo.

La filoj, nepoj kaj pranepoj de regxo estas regxidoj. La hebreoj estas
Izraelidoj, cxar ili devenas de Izraelo. Cxevalido estas nematura
cxevalo, kokido nematura koko, bovido nematura bovo, birdido nematura
birdo. Tiu bela tero trovis sin en tre praa stato.

Johanon, Nikolaon, Erneston, Vilhelmon, Marion, Klaron kaj Sofion iliaj
gepatroj nomas Johancxjo (aux Jocxjo), Nikolcxjo (aux Nikocxjo, aux
Nicxjo), Ernecxjo (aux Ercxjo), Vilhelcxjo (aux Vilhecxjo, aux Vilcxjo,
aux Vicxjo), Manjo (aux Marinjo), Klanjo kaj Sonjo (aux Sofinjo).


                               LESSON 44.

                      Suffixes -ebl-, -ind-, -em-.

These three suffixes are used to form adjectives.

"-ebl-" means "possible to be" what the word to which it is added
signifies, as "Vidi", to see; "videbla", able to be seen; "Auxdi", to
hear; "auxdebla", able to be heard, audible; "Movi", to move; "movebla",
movable; "Ebla", possible; "eble", possibly.

"-ind-" means "worthy of" what the word denotes, as "Honoro", honour;
"honorinda", honourable, worthy of honour; "Honti", to be ashamed;
"hontinda", shameful; "Indo", worth; "inda", worthy of.

"-em-" means having an "inclination towards" or "propensity" for, or
"being disposed towards" something as "Forgesi", to forget; "forgesema",
forgetful; "Servi" to serve; "servema", willing to serve, obliging.
"Ema" fond of.

The difference between the three suffixes is shown by the following
words:--

"Kredebla", possible of belief; "kredinda", worthy of belief; "kredema",
having a tendency to believe readily, credulous.

"Legebla", able to be read; "leginda", worthy of being read; "legema",
fond of reading, inclined to read.

                              VOCABULARY.

   sxtalo : steel.                    memor- : remember.
   spirito : spirit,                  ekscit- : excite.
   bagatelo : trifle.                 vengx- : revenge.
   fleks- : bend.                     kredeble : probably.
   lauxd- : praise.                   kompreneble : of course.
   renvers- : turn over.

Sxtalo estas fleksebla, sed fero ne estas fleksebla. Ne cxiu kreskajxo
estas mangxebla. Vitro estas rompebla kaj travidebla. Via parolo
estas tute nekomprenebla, kaj viaj leteroj estas cxiam skribitaj tute
nelegeble. La mallumo estas netrapenetrebla. Li rakontis al mi historion
tute nekredeblan. Eble mi povos helpi al vi. Cxu vi amas vian patron?
Kia demando! kompreneble, ke mi lin amas. Mi kredeble ne povos veni al
vi hodiaux, cxar mi pensas, ke mi mem havos hodiaux gastojn. La tablo
staras malrekte kaj kredeble baldaux renversigxos. Li faris sian eblon.

Li estas homo ne kredinda. Via ago estas tre lauxdinda. Tiu cxi grava
tago restos por mi cxiam memorinda. Gxi estas vesto de granda indo. Gxi
ne estas inda je danko. La sxipanaro montrigxas ne inda je sia estro.

Lia edzino estas tre laborema kaj sxparema, sed sxi estas ankaux tre
babilema kaj kriema. Li estas tre ekkolerema, kaj ekscitigxas ofte
cxe la plej malgranda bagatelo, tamen li estas tre pardonema, li ne
portas longe la koleron, kaj li tute ne estas vengxema. Li estas tre
kredema, ecx la plej nekredeblajn aferojn, kiujn rakontas al li la plej
nekredindaj homoj, li tuj kredas. Li estas tre purema, kaj ecx unu
polveron vi ne trovos sur lia vesto. Li estas bonega knabo, sed tre ema
kredi spiritojn.